     
     
     
     
     
                                                           HAMLET.'  
                                                          Exeunt.  
                                                          Exeunt.  
                                                          Exeunt.  
                                                          Exeunt.  
                                                          Exeunt.  
                                                          Exeunt.  
                                                          Exeunt.  
                                                          Exeunt.  
                                                          Exeunt.  
                                                        Polonius.  
                                                      'HAMLET.'  
                                                      Exit Ghost.  
                                                      Exit Ghost.  
                                                      Exit Ghost.  
                                                     Attendants].  
                                                     [He] sleeps.  
                                                    Exit Horatio.  
                                                    are shot off.    
                                                   Exit Reynaldo.  
                                                  A noise within.  
                                                  Exeunt Players.  
                                                  Exit Messenger.  
                                                  The cock crows.  
                                                  [Exit Horatio.]    
                                                 Exit [Polonius].  
                                                 Exit [Polonius].    
                                                 Prepare to play.  
                                                 [Ghost beckons.]    
                                                Exeunt Gentlemen.  
                                                Spreads his arms.  
                                              Leaps in the grave.  
                                              [Reads] the letter.  
                                             [Exit Second Clown.]    
                                             [Grapples with him].  
                                            Ghost beckons Hamlet.  
                                          [Retires with Horatio.]    
                                         Exeunt Ghost and Hamlet.  
                                         Exeunt [all but Hamlet].  
                                         [Exeunt all but Hamlet.]    
                                       Exeunt King and Polonius].  
                                       Throws up [another skull].  
                                    Exeunt [all but the Captain].  
                                    Pours the poison in his ears.  
                                   [Sits down at Ophelia's feet.]    
                                  Exeunt Voltemand and Cornelius.  
                                 Flourish. Exeunt all but Hamlet.  
                               A noise within: 'Let her come in.'  
                               Exeunt all but Hamlet and Horatio.  
                             'He that thou knowest thine, HAMLET.'  
                             Enter Polonius.  
                             Enter a Lord.  
                             Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.  
                            Enter Hamlet.  
                            Enter Queen.  
                           Enter Hamlet.  
                           Enter Sailors.  
                           Exeunt [Rosencrantz and Guildenstern].  
                          Enter Ghost.  
                          Enter Hamlet.  
                          Enter Lucianus.  
                          Enter Polonius.  
                         Enter Ghost.  
                         Enter Polonius.  
                        Enter Ophelia.  
                        Enter Polonius.    
                        Exeunt King and Queen, [with Attendants].  
                        [Clown digs and] sings.  
                        carrying torches.  
                       Enter Ghost again.  
                       Enter Horatio.  
                       Enter Ophelia.    
                       Enter Prologue.  
                      Enter a Messenger.  
                      Enter four or five Players.  
                      Enter the Players with recorders.    
                      Flourish for the Players.  
                     Enter Horatio and Marcellus.    
                     Enter King.  
                     Enter Laertes with others.  
                     Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.  
                     Enter Rosencrantz.  
                     change rapiers, [and Hamlet wounds Laertes].  
                    A flourish of trumpets, and two pieces go off.  
                    Enter Horatio and Marcellus.  
                    Enter King and Polonius.  
                    Enter Polonius.  
                   Colours, and Attendants.  
                  Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.  
                  Enter Hamlet, reading on a book.  
                  Enter Ophelia distracted.  
                  Enter a Messenger with letters.  
                  Enter young Osric, a courtier.  
                  Exeunt Polonius and Players [except the First].  
                  Ghost cries under the stage.  
                 Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.  
                 Enter the Ghost in his nightgown.  
                A table and flagons of wine on it.    
                Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.  
                Hautboys play. The dumb show enters.  
                [Drum; trumpets sound; a piece goes off [within].  
               Alack, and fie for shame!  
               All in the morning bedtime,  
               An thou hadst not come to my bed.'  
               And dupp'd the chamber door,  
               At his heels a stone.  
               Attendants with foils and gauntlets.  
               By Cock, they are to blame.  
               Enter Polonius, Voltemand, and Cornelius.  
               Enter [two Players as] King and Queen.    
               For such a guest is meet.  
               He is dead and gone;  
               Never departed more.  
               To be your Valentine.  
               You promis'd me to wed.'  
              Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.  
             'So would I 'a' done, by yonder sun,  
             And I a maid at your window,  
             At his head a grass-green turf,  
             But never doubt I love.  
             Doubt that the sun doth move;  
             Enter Polonius, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.  
             Quoth she, 'Before you tumbled me,  
             [Makes a pass through the arras and] kills Polonius.  
            'As by lot, God wot,'  
            'It came to pass, as most like it was.'  
            (Hey non nony, nony, hey nony)  
            A very, very- pajock.  
            And his sandal shoon.  
            And we cast away moan.  
            As if I had never been such.  
            For and a shrouding sheet;  
            For such a guest is meet.  
            From another one?  
            Go to thy deathbed;  
            Hath clawed me in his clutch,  
            He is gone, he is gone,  
            Larded all with sweet flowers;  
            No, no, he is dead;    
            The which he loved passing well.'  
            This realm dismantled was    
            With true-love showers.  
           'Doubt thou the stars are fire;  
           Doubt truth to be a liar;  
           Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Bernardo.  
           The hart ungalled play;  
           Thus runs the world away.  
          'One fair daughter, and no more,  
          'The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,  
          'The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast-'  
          A pickaxe and a spade, a spade,  
          All flaxen was his poll.  
          And hath shipped me intil the land,  
          And in his grave rain'd many a tear.  
          And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,  
          And will he not come again?  
          And will he not come again?  
          Bak'd and impasted with the parching streets,  
          For if the King like not the comedy,  
          For some must watch, while some must sleep:  
          For thou dost know, O Damon dear,  
          God 'a'mercy on his soul!  
          Hath now this dread and black complexion smear'd    
          He never will come again.  
          His beard was as white as snow,  
          Methought it was very sweet;  
          O, a Pit of clay for to be made    
          O, methought there- a- was nothing- a- meet.  
          Old grandsire Priam seeks.'  
          To their lord's murther. Roasted in wrath and fire,  
          When he lay couched in the ominous horse,  
          Why then, belike he likes it not, perdy.  
          With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,  
         Enter Hamlet and Guildenstern [with Attendants].  
        Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, [Guildenstern,] and others.  
        In youth when I did love, did love,  
        To contract- O- the time for- a- my behove,  
       'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have pronounc'd.  
       'Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him,  
       (Unless things mortal move them not at all)  
       A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up-    
       A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,  
       About her lank and all o'erteemed loins,  
       About the world have times twelve thirties been,  
       An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope,  
       And as my love is siz'd, my fear is so.  
       And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,  
       And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,  
       And never come mischance between us twain!  
       And passion in the gods.'  
       And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,  
       And who in want a hollow friend doth try,  
       And, like a neutral to his will and matter,  
       Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.  
       Aroused vengeance sets him new awork;  
       As low as to the fiends!  
       Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,  
       Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,  
       But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.  
       But fill unshaken when they mellow be.  
       But if the gods themselves did see her then,  
       But what we do determine oft we break.  
       But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword    
       But woe is me! you are so sick of late,  
       But, as we often see, against some storm,  
       But, orderly to end where I begun,    
       Confederate season, else no creature seeing;  
       Did nothing.  
       Directly seasons him his enemy.  
       Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must;  
       Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,  
       For 'tis a question left us yet to prove,  
       For husband shalt thou-  
       For who not needs shall never lack a friend,  
       For women's fear and love holds quantity,  
       Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.  
       Here stooping to your clemency,  
       If, once a widow, ever I be wife!  
       In Mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,  
       In general synod take away her power;  
       In neither aught, or in extremity.  
       Make us again count o'er ere love be done!  
       Meet what I would have well, and it destroy,  
       My operant powers their functions leave to do.  
       Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,  
       None wed the second but who killed the first.  
       Now falls on Priam.  
       Now what my love is, proof hath made you know;  
       Of reverend Priam, seem'd i' th' air to stick.  
       Of violent birth, but poor validity;  
       On Mars's armour, forg'd for proof eterne,  
       On wholesome life usurp immediately.  
       Ophelia,'-  
       Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.  
       Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods,    
       Purpose is but the slave to memory,  
       Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;  
       Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,  
       Repugnant to command. Unequal match'd,  
       Since love our hearts, and Hymen did our hands,  
       So far from cheer and from your former state.  
       So think thou wilt no second husband wed;  
       So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood,  
       Sport and repose lock from me day and night,  
       Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,  
       Such love must needs be treason in my breast.  
       Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo! his sword,  
       Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,  
       That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,  
       That even our loves should with our fortunes change;  
       That our devices still are overthrown;  
       The great man down, you mark his favourite flies,  
       The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.  
       The poor advanc'd makes friends of enemies;  
       The tedious day with sleep.  
       Their own enactures with themselves destroy.  
       Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,  
       To desperation turn my trust and hope,  
       To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.  
       Unite comutual in most sacred bands.  
       What to ourselves in passion we propose,  
       When second husband kisses me in bed.  
       When second husband let me be accurst!  
       Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;  
       Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,  
       Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.  
       Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;  
       Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.  
       Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree,    
       With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,  
       be otherwise.  
       phrase.  
      discretion.  
     'Good sir,' or so, or 'friend,' or 'gentleman'-  
     'I saw him enter such a house of sale,'  
     'In her excellent white bosom, these, &c.'  
     'Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!'  
     'Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.  
     'Now the King drinks to Hamlet.' Come, begin.  
     'That can denote me truly. These indeed seem,  
     'Thus didest thou.'  
     'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,  
     'Tis heavy with him; and am I then reveng'd,  
     'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,    
     'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,  
     'Tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:  
     'Tis now the very witching time of night,  
     'Tis strange.  
     'twere, the mirror up to nature; to show Virtue her own feature,  
     (As I perceiv'd it, I must tell you that,  
     (As how should it be so? how otherwise?),  
     (For so this side of our known world esteem'd him)  
     (For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death),  
     (O royal knavery!), an exact command,  
     (Sings) He is dead and gone, lady,    
     (Sings) To-morrow is Saint Valentine's day,  
     (Sings) White his shroud as the mountain snow-  
     (Things standing thus unknown) shall live behind me!  
     A brother's murther! Pray can I not,  
     A chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,  
     A couch for luxury and damned incest.  
     A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,  
     A damn'd defeat was made. Am I a coward?  
     A double blessing is a double grace;  
     A face without a heart,'  
     A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,  
     A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,  
     A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it;  
     A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,  
     A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.  
     A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face doth glow;  
     A sable silver'd.  
     A savageness in unreclaimed blood,  
     A scullion!    
     A sister driven into desp'rate terms,  
     A sword unbated, and, in a pass of practice,  
     A very noble youth. Mark.  
     A villain kills my father; and for that,  
     A violet in the youth of primy nature,  
     A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends."  
     Absent thee from felicity awhile,  
     Acts little of his will. Tell me, Laertes,  
     Adieu, adieu, adieu! Remember me.                      Exit.    
     Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.  
     Affront Ophelia.    
     After the thing it loves.  
     Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven,  
     Against yourself. I know you are no truant.  
     Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen to-night!  
     Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd?  
     All from her father's death. O Gertrude, Gertrude,  
     All given to mine ear.  
     All may be well.                                  He kneels.  
     All my smooth body.  
     Almost to jelly with the act of fear,  
     Among a mineral of metals base,  
     An eye like Mars, to threaten and command;  
     An hour of quiet shortly shall we see;  
     An understanding simple and unschool'd;  
     And (would it were not so!) you are my mother.  
     And I am sick at heart.  
     And I believe it is a fetch of warrant.  
     And I with them the third night kept the watch;  
     And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,  
     And You must put me in your heart for friend,  
     And a man's life is no more than to say 'one.'  
     And a most instant tetter bark'd about,    
     And all we mourn for.    
     And am most sensibly in grief for it,  
     And at our more consider'd time we'll read,    
     And bear it to the chapel.  
     And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,  
     And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.  
     And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;  
     And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.  
     And break your own neck down.  
     And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.  
     And by opposing end them. To die- to sleep-  
     And call it accident.  
     And call the noblest to the audience.  
     And can say nothing! No, not for a king,  
     And carriage of the article design'd,  
     And cleave the general ear with horrid speech;  
     And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,  
     And curd, like eager droppings into milk,  
     And draw you into madness? Think of it.  
     And drive his purpose on to these delights.  
     And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed    
     And end his being. That done, he lets me go,  
     And even the like precurse of fierce events,  
     And fall a-cursing like a very drab,  
     And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!  
     And for my soul, what can it do to that,  
     And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.  
     And for the day confin'd to fast in fires,  
     And for your rapier most especially,  
     And foreign mart for implements of war;  
     And from her fair and unpolluted flesh    
     And from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd him.  
     And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more.  
     And gather by him, as he is behav'd,  
     And gem of all the nation.  
     And gins to pale his uneffectual fire.  
     And hath abatements and delays as many    
     And he to England shall along with you.  
     And he, repulsed, a short tale to make,  
     And hears it roar beneath.  
     And here give up ourselves, in the full bent,  
     And his commission to employ those soldiers,  
     And hit the woundless air.- O, come away!  
     And how his audit stands, who knows save heaven?  
     And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,  
     And hurt my brother.  
     And in a postscript here, he says 'alone.'  
     And in part him.' Do you mark this, Reynaldo?  
     And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,  
     And it must follow, as the night the day,  
     And keep you in the rear of your affection,    
     And lay your hands again upon my sword.  
     And let him know so.  
     And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,  
     And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,  
     And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.  
     And let us hear Bernardo speak of this.  
     And let us once again assail your ears,  
     And live the purer with the other half,  
     And lose the name of action.- Soft you now!  
     And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg, Laertes,  
     And many such-like as's of great charge,  
     And marshal me to knavery. Let it work;  
     And meant to wrack thee; but beshrew my jealousy!  
     And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame    
     And more above, hath his solicitings,  
     And much offence too. Touching this vision here,  
     And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:  
     And not have strew'd thy grave.  
     And not where I had aim'd them.  
     And nothing is at a like goodness still;  
     And now I'll do't. And so he goes to heaven,  
     And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?  
     And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God b' wi', you.  
     And our affairs from England come too late.    
     And our vain blows malicious mockery.  
     And pious action we do sugar o'er    
     And pity 'tis 'tis true. A foolish figure!  
     And prais'd be rashness for it; let us know,  
     And prey on garbage.  
     And prologue to the omen coming on,  
     And put it in his pocket!    
     And reason panders will.  
     And recks not his own rede.  
     And scape detecting, I will pay the theft.  
     And shall I couple hell? Hold, hold, my heart!  
     And since so neighbour'd to his youth and haviour,  
     And so am I reveng'd. That would be scann'd.  
     And so, without more circumstance at all,  
     And spur my dull revenge! What is a man,  
     And stand a comma 'tween their amities,  
     And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.  
     And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,  
     And tell you what I know.  
     And that I see, in passages of proof,  
     And that our drift look through our bad performance.  
     And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine-    
     And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,  
     And then this 'should' is like a spendthrift sigh,  
     And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,  
     And they can well on horseback; but this gallant    
     And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.  
     And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.  
     And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,  
     And thrice his head thus waving up and down,  
     And thus a while the fit will work on him.  
     And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,  
     And thy best graces spend it at thy will!  
     And to the last bended their light on me.  
     And vanish'd from our sight.  
     And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,  
     And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?  
     And what's in prayer but this twofold force,  
     And whatsoever else shall hap to-night,  
     And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,  
     And when you are desirous to be blest,  
     And where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weigh'd,  
     And where th' offence is let the great axe fall.  
     And will not wrong it.  
     And will this brother's wager frankly play.  
     And with th' encorporal air do hold discourse?  
     And you are stay'd for. There- my blessing with thee!  
     And you the judges, bear a wary eye.  
     And you yourself shall keep the key of it.  
     And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,  
     And, England, if my love thou hold'st at aught,-  
     And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,  
     And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,  
     And, as the world were now but to begin,  
     And, as you said, and wisely was it said,  
     And, but that great command o'ersways the order,  
     And, like a man to double business bound,  
     And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,  
     And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up;  
     And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,  
     Answer, and think upon this business.  
     Antiquity forgot, custom not known,  
     Are burnt and purg'd away. But that I am forbid    
     Are joyfully return'd.  
     Are mortis'd and adjoin'd; which when it falls,  
     Are most select and generous, chief in that.  
     Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,  
     Art more engag'd! Help, angels! Make assay.    
     As 'Well, well, we know,' or 'We could, an if we would,'  
     As 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' th' working,  
     As England was his faithful tributary,  
     As I do thee. Something too much of this I  
     As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note;  
     As any the most vulgar thing to sense,  
     As by your safety, wisdom, all things else,  
     As day does to your eye.  
     As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this, ha?  
     As did that one; and that, in my regard,  
     As e'er my conversation cop'd withal.  
     As fits a king's remembrance.  
     As from the body of contraction plucks    
     As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.  
     As he is very potent with such spirits,  
     As he would draw it. Long stay'd he so.  
     As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.  
     As in their birth,- wherein they are not guilty,  
     As infinite as man may undergo-    
     As it behooves my daughter and your honour.  
     As it doth well appear unto our state,  
     As it hath us'd to do- that I have found    
     As kill a king, and marry with his brother.    
     As level as the cannon to his blank,  
     As love between them like the palm might flourish,  
     As made the things more rich. Their perfume lost,  
     As make your bouts more violent to that end-  
     As may dishonour him- take heed of that;  
     As meditation or the thoughts of love,  
     As my great power thereof may give thee sense,  
     As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?  
     As one incapable of her own distress,  
     As one, in suff'ring all, that suffers nothing;  
     As stars with trains of fire, and dews of blood,  
     As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;  
     As therein are set down.  
     As they fell out by time, by means, and place,  
     As thus, 'I know his father and his friends,  
     As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.  
     As to peace-parted souls.  
     As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,  
     As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful;  
     As will not leave their tinct.  
     As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,  
     Assume a virtue, if you have it not.  
     At last, a little shaking of mine arm,  
     At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,  
     Awake the god of day; and at his warning,  
     Be all my sins rememb'red.  
     Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come.  
     Be buried quick with her, and so will I.  
     Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.  
     Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe!  
     Be something scanter of your maiden presence.  
     Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn'd,  
     Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar:  
     Be thy intents wicked or charitable,  
     Be wary then; best safety lies in fear.  
     Be you and I behind an arras then.  
     Be you content to lend your patience to us,  
     Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage;  
     Bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.  
     Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.  
     Been thus encount'red. A figure like your father,  
     Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;  
     Before my daughter told me), what might you,  
     Behind the arras hearing something stir,  
     Being a thing immortal as itself?    
     Being nature's livery, or fortune's star,  
     Believe so much in him, that he is young,  
     Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?    
     Both countenance and excuse. Ho, Guildenstern!  
     Both to my God and to my gracious king;  
     Bow, stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel,  
     Break we our watch up; and by my advice    
     Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,  
     Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,  
     Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,  
     Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!  
     But I am very sorry, good Horatio,  
     But I do prophesy th' election lights    
     But I have that within which passeth show-  
     But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?  
     But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue!  
     But come!  
     But do not go with it!  
     But even his mother shall uncharge the practice    
     But even then the morning cock crew loud,  
     But farewell it, for I will use no art.    
     But from what cause he will by no means speak.  
     But he's an arrant knave.  
     But how does it well? It does well to those that do ill. Now,  
     But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,  
     But in battalions! First, her father slain;  
     But in our circumstance and course of thought,  
     But keep a farm and carters.  
     But let it be. Horatio, I am dead;  
     But let me hear from you.  
     But let that go.  
     But let this same be presently perform'd,  
     But look, amazement on thy mother sits.  
     But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,  
     But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know;  
     But mere implorators of unholy suits,    
     But never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,  
     But not express'd in fancy; rich, not gaudy;  
     But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son-  
     But our cold maids do dead men's fingers call them.  
     But pardon't, as you are a gentleman.  
     But since he is better'd, we have therefore odds.  
     But since, so jump upon this bloody question,  
     But soft! behold! Lo, where it comes again!  
     But soft! but soft! aside! Here comes the King-  
     But soft! methinks I scent the morning air.  
     But that I know love is begun by time,  
     But that the dread of something after death-  
     But that this folly douts it.                          Exit.  
     But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,  
     But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.  
     But to confront the visage of offence?  
     But to my mind, though I am native here    
     But truly I do fear it.  
     But two months dead! Nay, not so much, not two.  
     But virtue, as it never will be mov'd,  
     But what is your affair in Elsinore?  
     But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?  
     But wilt thou bear me how I did proceed?  
     But you must know, your father lost a father;  
     But you shall hear. Thus:  
     But you'll be secret?  
     But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,  
     But, in the gross and scope of my opinion,  
     But, like the owner of a foul disease,  
     Buys out the law; but 'tis not so above.  
     By desperate appliance are reliev'd,  
     By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!-  
     By indirections find directions out.  
     By letters congruing to that effect,  
     By the mass, I was about to say something! Where did I leave?  
     By the o'ergrowth of some complexion,  
     By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,  
     By what it fed on; and yet, within a month-  
     Can serve my turn? 'Forgive me my foul murther'?  
     Can you advise me?  
     Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,  
     Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,  
     Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,    
     Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,  
     Come hither, gentlemen,  
     Come on! You hear this fellow in the cellarage.  
     Come short of what he did.  
     Come, I will give you way for these your letters,  
     Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.  
     Come, some music!  
     Come.  
     Come. (They play.) Another hit. What say you?  
     Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.  
     Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!  
     Consent to swear.  
     Contagious blastments are most imminent.  
     Convert his gives to graces; so that my arrows,  
     Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,    
     Couch we awhile, and mark.  
     Could not (with all their quantity of love)  
     Could not so mope.  
     Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,  
     Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,  
     Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,  
     Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.  
     Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!  
     Delay it not; I'll have him hence to-night.  
     Depriv'd thee of! Hold off the earth awhile,  
     Devis'd a new commission; wrote it fair.  
     Devoutly to be wish'd. To die- to sleep.  
     Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.  
     Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal'd compact,  
     Did sometimes march? By heaven I charge thee speak!  
     Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;    
     Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.  
     Dies in his own too-much. That we would do,  
     Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw    
     Divided from herself and her fair-judgment,  
     Do I impart toward you. For your intent    
     Do not as some ungracious pastors do,  
     Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,  
     Do not itself unkennel in one speech,  
     Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?  
     Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,  
     Does by their own insinuation grow.  
     Does not divide the Sunday from the week.  
     Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night,  
     Doth all the noble substance often dout To his own scandal.  
     Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day?  
     Drabbing. You may go so far.  
     Drink off this potion! Is thy union here?  
     Each small annexment, petty consequence,  
     Each toy seems Prologue to some great amiss.  
     Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,  
     Elsinore.  
     Enquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;  
     Enter Fortinbras and English Ambassadors, with Drum,  
     Enter [priests with] a coffin [in funeral procession], King,  
     Even in their promise, as it is a-making,  
     Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?  
     Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,  
     Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.  
     Excitements of my reason and my blood,  
     Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,  
     Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I  
     Fare you well, my dove!  
     Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.  
     Farewell, dear mother.  
     Farewell.  
     Farewell. My blessing season this in thee!  
     Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,  
     Feeds on his wonder, keep, himself in clouds,  
     Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,  
     Fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,  
     Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,  
     Follow my mother.                                 King dies.  
     For England.  
     For Hecuba!  
     For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,  
     For art and exercise in your defence,  
     For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,    
     For every man hath business and desire,  
     For goodness, growing to a plurisy,  
     For he himself is subject to his birth.  
     For he was likely, had he been put on,  
     For her perfections. But my revenge will come.  
     For it is as the air, invulnerable,  
     For like the hectic in my blood he rages,  
     For loan oft loses both itself and friend,  
     For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.  
     For my part, I do not lie in't, yet it is mine.  
     For the apparel oft proclaims the man,  
     For the demand of our neglected tribute.  
     For the supply and profit of our hope,  
     For they are actions that a man might play;  
     For this effect defective comes by cause.  
     For use almost can change the stamp of nature,  
     For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,  
     For we will fetters put upon this fear,  
     For what advancement may I hope from thee,    
     For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,  
     For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,  
     For your desire to know what is between us,  
     For, though I am not splenitive and rash,  
     Fordo it own life. 'Twas of some estate.  
     Form of the thing, each word made true and good,  
     Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep;  
     Forward, not permanent- sweet, not lasting;  
     Free me so far in your most generous thoughts    
     Friends both, go join you with some further aid.  
     From fashion of himself. What think you on't?  
     From our achievements, though perform'd at height,  
     From the fair forehead of an innocent love,  
     From the first corse till he that died to-day,  
     Get from him why he puts on this confusion,  
     Get you a place.  
     Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice;  
     Give him the cup.  
     Give it an understanding but no tongue.  
     Give me my father!  
     Give me one poor request.  
     Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha't.  
     Give us the foils. Come on.  
     Give you good night.                                   Exit.  
     Give, me superfluous death.                  A noise within.  
     Go on. I'll follow thee.  
     Go to your rest; at night we'll feast together.  
     Go, bid the soldiers shoot.  
     God bless you, sir!  
     God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together;  
     Gonzago'?  
     Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.-  
     Good night, mother.  
     Good night- but go not to my uncle's bed.  
     Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel;  
     Grop'd I to find out them; had my desire,  
     Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,    
     Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,  
     Had it th' ability of life to thank you.  
     Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,  
     Had witchcraft in't. He grew unto his seat,  
     Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,  
     Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd;  
     Hamlet the Dane.                    [Leaps in after Laertes.  
     Haply the seas, and countries different,  
     Hath given me this. Now gather, and surmise.  
     Hath in the skirts of Norway, here and there,  
     Hath turn'd itself on me. Lo, here I lie,  
     Have of your audience been most free and bounteous.  
     Have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy,  
     He answers:  
     He closes thus: 'I know the gentleman.  
     He closes with you in this consequence:  
     He likewise gives a frock or livery,  
     He may approve our eyes and speak to it.  
     He may not, as unvalued persons do,  
     He never gave commandment for their death.  
     He seem'd to find his way without his eyes,  
     He should the bearers put to sudden death,  
     He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.  
     He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,  
     He that hath kill'd my king, and whor'd my mother;  
     He took my father grossly, full of bread,  
     He's lov'd of the distracted multitude,  
     Hecuba.  
     Help, help, ho!  
     Her brother is in secret come from France;  
     Her father and myself (lawful espials)  
     Her mood will needs be pitied.  
     Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,  
     Here in the lobby.  
     Here was a gentleman of Normandy.  
     Here's to thy health.  
     Here's yet some liquor left.  
     Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows.    
     Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,  
     High on a stage be placed to the view;  
     His access to me.  
     His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God! God!  
     His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.  
     His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,  
     His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,  
     His further gait herein, in that the levies,  
     His greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own;  
     His liberty is full of threats to all-  
     His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.  
     His means of death, his obscure funeral-  
     His silence will sit drooping.  
     Hold it a fashion, and a toy in blood;  
     Hold you the watch to-night?  
     Holding a weak supposal of our worth,  
     Horatio!- or I do forget myself.  
     How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!  
     How does my good Lord Hamlet?  
     How does your honour for this many a day?  
     How in my words somever she be shent,  
     How much I had to do to calm his rage I  
     How now O What hath befall'n?  
     How now, Ophelia? What's the matter?  
     How now, my lord? Will the King hear this piece of work?  
     How now, sweet queen?  
     How now? What news?  
     How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!  
     How to forget that learning; but, sir, now    
     Howe'er my haps, my joys were ne'er begun.             Exit.  
     Hyperion's curls; the front of Jove himself;  
     I am afeard You make a wanton of me.  
     I am dead, Horatio. Wretched queen, adieu!  
     I am justly kill'd with mine own treachery.  
     I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.  
     I be so able as now.  
     I bought an unction of a mountebank,  
     I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.    
     I cannot live to hear the news from England,  
     I dare damnation. To this point I stand,  
     I do beseech you give him leave to go.  
     I do not set my life at a pin's fee;  
     I do receive your offer'd love like love,  
     I do repent; but heaven hath pleas'd it so,  
     I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!  
     I ha't!  
     I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.  
     I had my father's signet in my purse,  
     I have a daughter (have while she is mine),  
     I have seen myself, and serv'd against, the French,  
     I have sworn't.  
     I have taken note of it, the age is grown so picked that the toe    
     I hold it fit that we shake hands and part;  
     I hold my duty as I hold my soul,  
     I hop'd thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;  
     I lov'd you ever. But it is no matter.  
     I lov'd your father, and we love ourself,  
     I must be cruel, only to be kind;  
     I never gave you aught.  
     I once did hold it, as our statists do,  
     I pray thee stay with us, go not to Wittenberg.  
     I pray you go with me.  
     I pray you, now receive them.  
     I prithee take thy fingers from my throat;  
     I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,  
     I saw him yesterday, or t'other day,  
     I say, away!- Go on. I'll follow thee.  
     I shall not look upon his like again.  
     I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.  
     I stand in pause where I shall first begin,  
     I stay too long. But here my father comes.  
     I think it was to see my mother's wedding.  
     I thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid,  
     I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.  
     I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.  
     I will requite your loves. So, fare you well.  
     I will speak daggers to her, but use none.  
     I would know that.  
     I your commission will forthwith dispatch,  
     I'll blessing beg of you.- For this same lord,    
     I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.  
     I'll cross it, though it blast me.- Stay illusion!  
     I'll do't. Dost thou come here to whine?  
     I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room.-  
     I'll rant as well as thou.  
     I'll tent him to the quick. If he but blench,  
     I'll visit you.  
     I'll wipe away all trivial fond records,  
     If Hamlet from himself be taken away,  
     If Hamlet give the first or second hit,  
     If I had play'd the desk or table book,  
     If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.  
     If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,  
     If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,  
     If it be made of penetrable stuff;  
     If it be so- as so 'tis put on me,  
     If she unmask her beauty to the moon.  
     If there be any good thing to be done,  
     If this did blast in proof. Soft! let me see.  
     If thou art privy to thy country's fate,  
     If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,  
     If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,  
     If thou didst ever thy dear father love-  
     If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,  
     If with too credent ear you list his songs,  
     If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,  
     If you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,  
     If you oppos'd them. Sir, this report of his    
     If't be th' affliction of his love, or no,  
     Imperious Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,  
     Importing Denmark's health, and England's too,  
     In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups;  
     In censure of his seeming.  
     In dreadful secrecy impart they did,  
     In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this,  
     In equal scale weighing delight and dole,  
     In further evil?  
     In going back to school in Wittenberg,  
     In his true nature, and we ourselves compell'd,  
     In honourable fashion.  
     In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,  
     In noise so rude against me?  
     In the most high and palmy state of Rome,  
     In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,  
     In thee there is not half an hour of life.  
     In thews and bulk; but as this temple waxes,  
     In this distracted globe. Remember thee?  
     Indeed would make one think there might be thought,  
     Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven;  
     Into a tow'ring passion.  
     Into the chapel. I pray you haste in this.  
     Into the madness wherein now he raves,  
     Is apoplex'd; for madness would not err,  
     Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.  
     Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,  
     Is it not monstrous that this player here,  
     Is not this something more than fantasy?  
     Is not to stir without great argument,  
     Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,  
     Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,  
     Is strict in his arrest) O, I could tell you-  
     Is the great love the general gender bear him,  
     Is the main motive of our preparations,  
     Is thought-sick at the act.  
     Is very cunning in.  
     It could not move thus.    
     It had been so with us, had we been there.  
     It hath the primal eldest curse upon't,  
     It is 'Adieu, adieu! Remember me.'    
     It is a damned ghost that we have seen,  
     It is a poison temper'd by himself.  
     It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you.  
     It is most retrograde to our desire;  
     It is not, nor it cannot come to good.  
     It is our trick; nature her custom holds,  
     It may be death.  
     It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,  
     It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.  
     It was against your Highness; whereat griev'd,  
     It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.  
     It waves you to a more removed ground.  
     It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,  
     Itself to motion, like as it would speak;  
     Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels,  
     King, father, royal Dane. O, answer me?  
     King. 'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.  
     King. Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too;    
     King. I do believe you think what now you speak;  
     Laertes before you fall to play.    
     Larded with many several sorts of reasons,  
     Last, and as such containing as all these,  
     Leave us.  
     Led by a delicate and tender prince,  
     Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,  
     Let Hercules himself do what he may,  
     Let all the battlements their ordnance fire;  
     Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.    
     Let his queen mother all alone entreat him    
     Let it be tenable in your silence still;  
     Let me be cruel, not unnatural;  
     Let me be no assistant for a state,    
     Let me not think on't! Frailty, thy name is woman!-  
     Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,  
     Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,  
     Let the bloat King tempt you again to bed;  
     Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,    
     Like a good child and a true gentleman.  
     Like quills upon the fretful porpentine.  
     Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh;  
     Like to a murd'ring piece, in many places    
     Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,  
     Lives almost by his looks; and for myself,-  
     Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,  
     Look to't, I charge you. Come your ways.  
     Look where he goes even now out at the portal!  
     Look you, I'll go pray.  
     Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbrac'd,  
     Lost by his father, with all bands of law,  
     Luc. Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing;  
     Mad call I it; for, to define true madness,  
     Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go.         Exeunt.  
     Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou'lt mouth,  
     Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,  
     Make mad the guilty and appal the free,  
     Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,  
     Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?  
     Make you to ravel all this matter out,  
     Makes mouths at the invisible event,    
     Makes us traduc'd and tax'd of other nations;  
     Marcellus?  
     Mark the encounter. If he love her not,  
     Mark you,  
     May do t' express his love and friending to you,  
     May fit us to our shape. If this should fall,  
     May one be pardon'd and retain th' offence?  
     May sweep to my revenge.  
     May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,  
     Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour.  
     Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.  
     Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,  
     Millions of acres on us, till our ground,  
     Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,  
     More grief to hide than hate to utter love.  
     More honour'd in the breach than the observance.  
     More than in words?  
     Moreover that we much did long to see you,  
     Most free in his reply.  
     Most generous, and free from all contriving,  
     Most throughly for my father.  
     Most welcome home!                       Exeunt Ambassadors.  
     Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.  
     Must render up myself.  
     My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.  
     My custom always of the afternoon,  
     My father's spirit- in arms? All is not well.  
     My father, in his habit as he liv'd!  
     My father- methinks I see my father.  
     My head should be struck off.  
     My lord, not I.  
     My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.  
     My soul is full of discord and dismay.  
     My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,  
     My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth!            Exit.  
     My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites-  
     My too much changed son.- Go, some of you,  
     My uncle?  
     My virtue or my plague, be it either which,-  
     Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,  
     Nay, come, let's go together.    
     Neither a borrower nor a lender be;  
     Never to rise again. Thy mother's poison'd.  
     Never to speak of this that you have heard:  
     New lighted on a heaven-kissing hill:  
     No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,  
     No hat upon his head, his stockings foul'd,  
     No medicine in the world can do thee good.  
     No more, sweet Hamlet!  
     No more.  
     No noble rite nor formal ostentation,-  
     No traveller returns- puzzles the will,  
     No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,  
     No, in despite of sense and secrecy,  
     No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,  
     No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,  
     No, not to stay the finding of the axe,  
     No.  
     Nor any unproportion'd thought his act.  
     Nor customary suits of solemn black,  
     Nor the dejected havior of the visage,  
     Nor thine on me!                                       Dies.  
     Nor what he spake, though it lack'd form a little,  
     Nor windy suspiration of forc'd breath,  
     Not of that dye which their investments show,  
     Not shriving time allow'd.  
     Now I am alone.    
     Now fear I this will give it start again;  
     Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras,  
     Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.  
     Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,  
     Now wears his crown.  
     Now, out of this-  
     O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there,  
     O heavy burthen!  
     O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,  
     O most pernicious woman!  
     O shame! where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,  
     O thou vile king,  
     O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!  
     O what a rogue and peasant slave am I!  
     O wretched state! O bosom black as death!  
     O'er which his melancholy sits on brood;  
     O'erbears Your offices. The rabble call him lord;  
     O'ermaster't as you may. And now, good friends,    
     O, ho!  
     O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;  
     O, say!  
     O, speak!  
     O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!  
     O, vengeance!  
     O, you must wear your rue with a difference! There's a daisy. I  
     Occasion smiles upon a second leave.  
     Of Hamlet's transformation. So I call it,  
     Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters;  
     Of all their conference. If she find him not,  
     Of bell and burial.  
     Of blue Olympus.  
     Of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts;  
     Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,  
     Of deaths put on by cunning and forc'd cause;  
     Of entrance to a quarrel; but being in,  
     Of general assault.    
     Of habits evil, is angel yet in this,  
     Of him that brought them.  
     Of his affection to me.  
     Of his behaviour.  
     Of his own just remove; the people muddied,  
     Of his true state.  
     Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief;  
     Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd;  
     Of man and country-  
     Of mighty opposites.  
     Of mine own eyes.    
     Of my true mother.  
     Of the unworthiest siege.  
     Of thinking too precisely on th' event,-  
     Of this post-haste and romage in the land.  
     Of those effects for which I did the murther-  
     Of unimproved mettle hot and full,    
     Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings;  
     Offence's gilded hand may shove by justice,  
     Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,  
     On Fortinbras. He has my dying voice.  
     On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys,  
     On Fortune's cap we are not the very button.  
     On plots and errors happen.  
     One scene of it comes near the circumstance,  
     One word more, good lady.  
     Or 'If we list to speak,' or 'There be, an if they might,'  
     Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,  
     Or I could make a prologue to my brains,  
     Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,  
     Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,  
     Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!  
     Or for some frontier?  
     Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,  
     Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed;  
     Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?    
     Or look'd upon this love with idle sight?  
     Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,  
     Or not at all.  
     Or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,  
     Or pardon'd being down? Then I'll look up;  
     Or quit in answer of the third exchange,  
     Or rather say, the cause of this defect,  
     Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd    
     Or then, or then, with such or such; and, as you say,  
     Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,  
     Or you deny me right. Go but apart,  
     Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.  
     Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,  
     Our purpose may hold there.- But stay, what noise,  
     Our sovereign process, which imports at full,  
     Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,  
     Out of his lunacies.  
     Out of my weakness and my melancholy,  
     Out of the shot and danger of desire.  
     Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.  
     Over the nasty sty!  
     Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,  
     Passing through nature to eternity.    
     Perchance 'twill walk again.  
     Perpend.  
     Pinch wanton on your cheek; call you his mouse;  
     Pleasant and helpful to him!  
     Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?  
     Popp'd in between th' election and my hopes;  
     Possess it merely. That it should come to this!  
     Pray you be round with him.  
     Pro. For us, and for our tragedy,  
     Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,  
     Pursued my life.  
     Queen. Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light,  
     Queen. O, confound the rest!  
     Queen. Sleep rock thy brain,    
     Rankly abus'd. But know, thou noble youth,  
     Receiv'd his love?  
     Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,  
     Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!  
     Repast them with my blood.  
     Repent what's past; avoid what is to come;  
     Requite him for your father.    
     Resembles that it was. What it should be,  
     Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.  
     Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,  
     Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,  
     Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.    
     Rome-  
     Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?  
     Rough-hew them how we will-  
     Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.  
     Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.    
     Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,  
     Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?  
     Say, why is this? wherefore? What should we do?  
     See what a grace was seated on this brow;  
     See you now-  
     Seek for thy noble father in the dust.  
     Seem to me all the uses of this world!  
     Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on her.  
     Shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,  
     She turns to favour and to prettiness.  
     Should be as mortal as an old man's life?  
     Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!  
     Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,  
     Shows itself pure. He weeps for what is done.  
     Since frost itself as actively doth burn,  
     Since nature cannot choose his origin,-  
     Singeing his pate against the burning zone,  
     Sir, in this audience,  
     Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,  
     Sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,  
     So bloodily hast struck.  
     So by his father lost; and this, I take it,  
     So crimeful and so capital in nature,  
     So fast they follow. Your sister's drown'd, Laertes.  
     So frown'd he once when, in an angry parle,  
     So grace and mercy at your most need help you,  
     So hallow'd and so gracious is the time.  
     So levied as before, against the Polack;  
     So lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,  
     So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,  
     So much as from occasion you may glean,    
     So much from th' understanding of himself,  
     So nightly toils the subject of the land,  
     So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,  
     So you will not o'errule me to a peace.  
     So, by my former lecture and advice,  
     So, proceed you.  
     So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word:  
     Speak loudly for him.  
     Speak of it! Stay, and speak!- Stop it, Marcellus!  
     Speak to her, Hamlet.  
     Speak to me.  
     Speak to me.    
     Speak, man.  
     Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?  
     Sprung from neglected love.- How now, Ophelia?  
     Spurns enviously at straws; speaks things in doubt,  
     Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,  
     Stick fiery off indeed.  
     Still am I call'd. Unhand me, gentlemen.  
     Subscrib'd it, gave't th' impression, plac'd it safely,  
     Such as it is; and for my own poor part,  
     Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?    
     Sure he that made us with such large discourse,  
     Swear by my sword.  
     Swear by my sword.  
     Swear.  
     T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!  
     Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.  
     Take it to heart? Fie! 'tis a fault to heaven,  
     Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him;  
     Tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect,  
     Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,  
     Termagant. It out-herods Herod. Pray you avoid it.  
     Th' effect of what I wrote?  
     Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,  
     Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,  
     Th' important acting of your dread command?  
     Th' observ'd of all observers- quite, quite down!  
     Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,  
     Than I to Hercules. Within a month,  
     Than Young Laertes, in a riotous head,  
     Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,  
     Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.  
     Than fly to others that we know not of?  
     Than is my deed to my most painted word.  
     Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.  
     Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,  
     Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.  
     Than to entreaty.  
     Than your particular demands will touch it.  
     That I am guiltless of your father's death,  
     That I essentially am not in madness,  
     That I have Positively said ''Tis so,'  
     That I have longed long to re-deliver.  
     That I have utt'red. Bring me to the test,  
     That I might be the organ.  
     That I must be their scourge and minister.  
     That I must call't in question.  
     That I shall live and tell him to his teeth,  
     That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee Hamlet,  
     That I, in forgery of shapes and tricks,  
     That I, the son of a dear father murther'd,  
     That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.  
     That aptly is put on. Refrain to-night,  
     That are but mutes or audience to this act,  
     That are so fortified against our story,  
     That beetles o'er his base into the sea,  
     That blurs the grace and blush of modesty;  
     That both the world, I give to negligence,  
     That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,  
     That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.  
     That else leans on th' affair. Pray you make haste.  
     That ever I was born to set it right!  
     That flesh is heir to. 'Tis a consummation    
     That guilty creatures, sitting at a play,  
     That has no relish of salvation in't-  
     That hath a stomach in't; which is no other,  
     That hath in it no profit but the name.  
     That have a father klll'd, a mother stain'd,  
     That he is mad, 'tis true: 'tis true 'tis pity;  
     That he is open to incontinency.  
     That he should weep for her? What would he do,  
     That hurts by easing. But to the quick o' th' ulcer!  
     That it is proof and bulwark against sense.  
     That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,  
     That live and feed upon your Majesty.  
     That makes calamity of so long life.  
     That may to thee do ease, and, race to me,  
     That not your trespass but my madness speaks.  
     That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;  
     That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,  
     That roars so loud and thunders in the index?  
     That rots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,  
     That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?  
     That she should lock herself from his resort,  
     That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.  
     That suck'd the honey of his music vows,  
     That swoopstake you will draw both friend and foe,  
     That they may seem the taints of liberty,  
     That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,  
     That thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind?  
     That thus he suffers for.  
     That thy rebellion looks so giantlike?  
     That to Laertes I forgot myself,  
     That treason can but peep to what it would,  
     That was and is the question of these wars.  
     That we can let our beard be shook with danger,  
     That we find out the cause of this effect-  
     That you do bend your eye on vacancy,  
     That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,  
     That you know aught of me- this is not to do,  
     That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,  
     That youth and observation copied there,  
     That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,    
     That, being of so young clays brought up with him,  
     That, for some vicious mole of nature in them,  
     That, from her working, all his visage wann'd,  
     That, if again this apparition come,  
     That, on the supervise, no leisure bated,  
     That, on the view and knowing of these contents,  
     That, open'd, lies within our remedy.  
     Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew!  
     The Devil himself.  
     The King is a thing-  
     The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,  
     The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.  
     The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?  
     The apparition comes. I knew your father.  
     The bark is ready and the wind at help,  
     The bell then beating one-  
     The better to beguile. This is for all:  
     The bird of dawning singeth all night long;  
     The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,  
     The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.  
     The changeling never known. Now, the next day    
     The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,  
     The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.  
     The courtier's, scholar's, soldier's, eye, tongue, sword,  
     The crowner hath sate on her, and finds it Christian burial.  
     The death I gave him. So again, good night.  
     The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,  
     The glass of fashion and the mould of form,  
     The hand more instrumental to the mouth,  
     The harlot's cheek, beautied with plast'ring art,  
     The head and source of all your son's distemper.  
     The head is not more native to the heart,  
     The hearers to collection; they aim at it,  
     The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,  
     The natural gates and alleys of the body,  
     The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,  
     The ocean, overpeering of his list,  
     The pangs of despis'd love, the law's delay,  
     The perfume and suppliance of a minute;  
     The pith and marrow of our attribute.  
     The portraiture of his. I'll court his favours.  
     The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.  
     The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England;    
     The ratifiers and props of every word,  
     The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.  
     The safety and health of this whole state,  
     The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.  
     The speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.  
     The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine;  
     The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,  
     The triumph of his pledge.  
     The trumpet to the cannoneer without,    
     The unseen good old man.  
     The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.  
     The very faculties of eyes and ears.  
     The very place puts toys of desperation,  
     The virtue of his will; but you must fear,  
     The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.  
     The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,  
     The woman will be out. Adieu, my lord.  
     Their virtues else- be they as pure as grace,  
     Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.  
     Then goes he to the length of all his arm,  
     Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,  
     Then, venom, to thy work.                    Hurts the King.  
     Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,  
     Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,  
     There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,  
     There falling out at tennis'; or perchance,  
     There is a play to-night before the King.  
     There was 'a gaming; there o'ertook in's rouse;  
     There's a divinity that shapes our ends,  
     There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her heart;  
     There, my lord.  
     Therefore I have entreated him along,    
     Therefore let's follow.  
     Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,  
     Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,  
     Thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride,  
     These but the trappings and the suits of woe.  
     These hands are not more like.  
     These words like daggers enter in mine ears.  
     They cry 'Choose we! Laertes shall be king!'  
     They find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give,  
     They had begun the play. I sat me down;  
     They have proclaim'd their malefactions;  
     They shall go far with little.    
     Thin settled age his sables and his weeds,  
     This above all- to thine own self be true,  
     This bodes some strange eruption to our state.  
     This grave shall have a living monument.  
     This is one Lucianus, nephew to the King.  
     This is th' imposthume of much wealth and peace,  
     This is the very ecstasy of love,  
     This man shall set me packing.  
     This marvel to you.  
     This must not be.' And then I prescripts gave her,  
     This night to play before him.  
     This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.              Exit.  
     This presence knows,  
     This present object made probation.  
     This something-settled matter in his heart,  
     This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.  
     This to your Majesty; this to the Queen.  
     This warlike volley.  
     This was your husband. Look you now what follows.  
     This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me;  
     Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,  
     Thou canst not then be false to any man.  
     Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.  
     Thou know'st 'tis common. All that lives must die,  
     Thou know'st already.  
     Thou liv'st; report me and my cause aright    
     Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul,  
     Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!  
     Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.  
     Though inclination be as sharp as will.  
     Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,  
     Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.  
     Through your dominions for this enterprise,  
     Thrown out his angle for my Proper life,  
     Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.  
     Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,    
     Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.  
     Thy knotted and combined locks to part,  
     Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.  
     Till our scale turn the beam. O rose of May!  
     Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,  
     Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers,  
     Till then in patience our proceeding be.  
     Till then sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,  
     Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.  
     To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,  
     To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,  
     To any pastime?  
     To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,    
     To be commanded.  
     To be contracted in one brow of woe,  
     To be forestalled ere we come to fall,    
     To both your honours.  
     To cast thee up again. What may this mean    
     To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever    
     To do't. Examples gross as earth exhort me.  
     To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!  
     To exploit now ripe in my device,  
     To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter'd?  
     To give in evidence. What then? What rests?  
     To give it due content.  
     To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.  
     To give the world assurance of a man.  
     To give them seals never, my soul, consent!             Exit.  
     To give these mourning duties to your father;  
     To grunt and sweat under a weary life,  
     To hear and see the matter.  
     To hear him so inclin'd.  
     To hear of it. They are here about the court,  
     To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him home;  
     To heaven.  
     To hide the slain? O, from this time forth,  
     To him from whom you brought them.                   Exeunt.  
     To his unmast'red importunity.  
     To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.  
     To lay our service freely at your feet,  
     To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you;  
     To let you know of it.  
     To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue;    
     To mine own room again; making so bold    
     To muddy death.  
     To offer it the show of violence;  
     To our most valiant brother. So much for him.  
     To outface me with leaping in her grave?  
     To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;  
     To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.  
     To punish me with this, and this with me,  
     To put an antic disposition on),    
     To show his grief. Let her be round with him;  
     To show my duty in your coronation,    
     To sleep- perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub!  
     To speak of horrors- he comes before me.  
     To take him in the purging of his soul,  
     To tell the secrets of my prison house,  
     To tell us this.  
     To the inheritance of Fortinbras,  
     To the next abstinence; the next more easy;  
     To the unsatisfied.  
     To those of mine!  
     To what I shall unfold.  
     To you alone.  
     To you in satisfaction; but if not,    
     To you yourself, to us, to every one.    
     To youth and liberty.  
     Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,  
     Together with remembrance of ourselves.  
     Too oft before their buttons be disclos'd,  
     Too slightly timber'd for so loud a wind,  
     Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us.  
     Treachery! Seek it out.  
     Truly deliver.  
     Try what repentance can. What can it not?  
     Under the which he shall not choose but fall;  
     Ungart'red, and down-gyved to his ankle;  
     Unhous'led, disappointed, unanel'd,  
     Unmix'd with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!  
     Unpeg the basket on the house's top,  
     Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.  
     Until my eyelids will no longer wag.  
     Unto our climature and countrymen.  
     Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,  
     Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.  
     Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor    
     Upon his will I seal'd my hard consent.  
     Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,  
     Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,  
     Upon the witness of these gentlemen,  
     Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.  
     Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg-  
     Virtue itself scopes not calumnious strokes.  
     Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!  
     Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.  
     Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.  
     Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Never Hamlet.  
     Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,  
     We cannot get from him.    
     We do it wrong, being so majestical,  
     We heard it all.- My lord, do as you please;  
     We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,  
     We shall express our duty in his eye;  
     We should do when we would; for this 'would' changes,  
     We will bestow ourselves.- [To Ophelia] Read on this book,  
     We would not understand what was most fit,  
     We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings-  
     We'll put the matter to the present push.-  
     We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.  
     Welcome, my good friends.  
     Well ratified by law and heraldry,  
     Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.  
     Were thicker than itself with brother's blood,  
     What I have said to you.  
     What does this mean, my lord?  
     What is between you? Give me up the truth.  
     What is the issue of the business there.    
     What is the matter?  
     What is the reason that you use me thus?  
     What is't but to be nothing else but mad?  
     What majesty should be, what duty is,  
     What might be toward, that this sweaty haste    
     What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?  
     What think you on't?  
     What thou hast said to me.  
     What warlike noise is this?  
     What we two nights have seen.  
     What wouldst thou have, Laertes?  
     What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,  
     What's near it with it. It is a massy wheel,  
     What, have you given him any hard words of late?  
     What, is Horatio there ?  
     When he is drunk asleep; or in his rage;  
     When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?    
     When he th' ambitious Norway combated.  
     When honour's at the stake. How stand I then,  
     When in one line two crafts directly meet.    
     When in your motion you are hot and dry-    
     When it prov'd otherwise.?  
     When sorrows come, they come not single spies.  
     When that her golden couplets are disclos'd,    
     When the compulsive ardour gives the charge,  
     When thou liest howling.  
     When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,  
     Where be his quiddits now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures,  
     Where is your son?  
     Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,  
     Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,  
     Where should We have our thanks?  
     Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?  
     Where we shall find him most conveniently.           Exeunt.  
     Where you may see the inmost part of you.  
     Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,  
     Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.         Exit.  
     Wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd,  
     Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,  
     Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.  
     Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,  
     Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,  
     Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,  
     Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,  
     Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,  
     Which I have told thee, of my father's death.    
     Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,  
     Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,  
     Which happily foreknowing may avoid,  
     Which have solicited- the rest is silence.             Dies.  
     Which he stood seiz'd of, to the conqueror;  
     Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand!  
     Which may to you, perhaps, seein much unsinew'd,  
     Which now goes too free-footed.  
     Which now, to claim my vantage doth invite me.  
     Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,  
     Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield them,  
     Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,  
     Whiles, like a puff'd and reckless libertine,  
     Whips out his rapier, cries 'A rat, a rat!'  
     Who calls me villain? breaks my pate across?  
     Who does it, then? His madness. If't be so,  
     Who hath reliev'd you?  
     Who in her duty and obedience, mark,  
     Who is't that can inform me?  
     Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;  
     Who was in life a foolish peating knave.  
     Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,  
     Whom I will trust as I will adders fang'd,  
     Whose image even but now appear'd to us,  
     Whose spirit, with divine ambition puff'd,  
     Whose violent property fordoes itself    
     Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,  
     Whose worth, if praises may go back again,  
     Why day is day, night is night, and time is time.  
     Why does the drum come hither?  
     Why seems it so particular with thee?  
     Why the man dies.- I humbly thank you, sir.  
     Why thou art thus incens'd. Let him go, Gertrude.  
     Why thy canoniz'd bones, hearsed in death,  
     Why yet I live to say 'This thing's to do,'  
     Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge!  
     Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,  
     Will be some danger; which for to prevent,  
     Will bring him to his wonted way again,  
     Will not debate the question of this straw.  
     Will not peruse the foils; so that with ease,  
     Will return'd shall know you are come home.  
     Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,  
     Will want true colour- tears perchance for blood.  
     Will you be rul'd by me?  
     Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.  
     Winner and loser?  
     With a bare bodkin? Who would these fardels bear,  
     With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;  
     With all my imperfections on my head.  
     With all my love I do commend me to you;  
     With almost all the holy vows of heaven.  
     With an auspicious, and a dropping eye,  
     With an entreaty, herein further shown,  
     With arms encumb'red thus, or this head-shake,  
     With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.  
     With forms to his conceit? And all for nothing!  
     With juice of cursed hebona in a vial,  
     With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.  
     With mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage,  
     With pestilent speeches of his father's death,  
     With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!  
     With this affair along. For all, our thanks.  
     With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,  
     With this slave's offal. Bloody bawdy villain!  
     With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?  
     With tristful visage, as against the doom,  
     With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?  
     With us to watch the minutes of this night,  
     With windlasses and with assays of bias,  
     With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts-  
     With wondrous potency. Once more, good night;  
     With, hoo! such bugs and goblins in my life-  
     Within his truncheon's length; whilst they distill'd    
     Within the book and volume of my brain,  
     Within the centre.  
     Without debatement further, more or less,  
     Without the which we are Pictures or mere beasts;  
     Witness this army of such mass and charge,  
     Woo't drink up esill? eat a crocodile?  
     Woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't tear thyself?  
     Words without thoughts never to heaven go.             Exit.  
     Worse than the mutinies in the bilboes. Rashly-  
     Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,  
     Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,  
     Would have mourn'd longer) married with my uncle;    
     Would have reverted to my bow again,  
     Would make them capable.- Do not look upon me,  
     Would quake to look on. Soft! now to my mother!  
     Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,  
     Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,  
     Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.  
     Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.  
     Yea, this solidity and compound mass,  
     Yes, faith, heartily.  
     Yet I,  
     Yet have I in me something dangerous,  
     Yet here she is allow'd her virgin crants,  
     Yet must not we put the strong law on him.  
     Yet now I must confess, that duty done,  
     Yet what can it when one cannot repent?  
     You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,  
     You are the most immediate to our throne,  
     You do remember all the circumstance?  
     You from the Polack wars, and you from England,  
     You have been talk'd of since your travel much,  
     You heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?  
     You know the wager?  
     You mainly were stirr'd up.  
     You must not put another scandal on him,  
     You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.  
     You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said.  
     You that look pale and tremble at this chance,  
     You told us of some suit. What is't, Laertes?  
     You, as your business and desires shall point you,  
     You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,  
     Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.  
     Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth;  
     Your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,  
     Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone    
     Your leave and favour to return to France;  
     Your loneliness.- We are oft to blame in this,  
     Your party in converse, him you would sound,  
     Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,  
     Your sudden coming o'er to play with you.  
     Your wisdom best shall think.  
     Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.  
     [Aside] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is)  
     [Sings] By Gis and by Saint Charity,    
     [Sings] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.  
     [To Laertes] Strengthen your patience in our last night's speech.  
     a chough; but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.    
     a thing to you from his Majesty.  
     about the mazzard with a sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution,  
     act hath three branches-it is to act, to do, and to perform;  
     again.  
     against their own succession.  
     amazement and admiration.  
     amble, and you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make your    
     and aunt-mother are deceiv'd.  
     and here's some for me. We may call it herb of grace o' Sundays.  
     and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go    
     answer is I can make, you shall command; or rather, as you say,  
     are unwrung.  
     argal, she drown'd herself wittingly.  
     as your daughter may conceive. Friend, look to't.  
     bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.  
     bellow for revenge.  
     bet against the Danish. Why is this all impon'd, as you call it?  
     boarded them. On the instant they got clear of our ship; so I  
     bonnet to his right use. 'Tis for the head.  
     brought, the gentleman willing, and the King hold his purpose,  
     but now the time gives it proof. I did love you once.  
     by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.  
     carpenter?  
     carry cannon by our sides. I would it might be hangers till then.    
     choose but weep to think they would lay him i' th' cold ground.  
     church. Argal, the gallows may do well to thee. To't again, come!  
     city? Are they so follow'd?  
     clouts.  
     dare scarce come thither.  
     defence?  
     desert, and who should scape whipping? Use them after your own    
     did the first murther! This might be the pate of a Politician,  
     died. They say he made a good end.  
     discourse most eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.  
     discourse to your beauty.  
     do, crawling between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves all;  
     dungeons, Denmark being one o' th' worst.  
     end.  
     enough, and likelihood to lead it; as thus: Alexander died,  
     epitaph is 'For O, for O, the hobby-horse is forgot!'  
     ere you had done.  
     excellence; but to know a man well were to know himself.  
     eyes. Prithee no more!  
     father?  
     favour she must come. Make her laugh at that. Prithee, Horatio,  
     favours?  
     fay, I cannot reason.  
     for England. Of them I have much to tell thee. Farewell.  
     for your succession in Denmark?  
     further trade with us?  
     gentleman.'  
     gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o' Christian burial.  
     gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as I may say)  
     grave-making?  
     guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.    
     hath sent me to you.  
     have not the skill.  
     have sent for you.  
     he has laid a great wager on your head. Sir, this is the matter-  
     he.  
     heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth,  
     help to hasten them?  
     himself; there are no tongues else for's turn.  
     his kibe.- How long hast thou been a grave-maker?  
     his love.  
     history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral,  
     hither?  
     hold up Adam's profession.  
     humanity so abominably.  
     i' th' university, you say?  
     if that his Majesty would aught with us,  
     if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.  
     image of a murther done in Vienna. Gonzago is the duke's name;  
     innovation.  
     insert in't, could you not?  
     into England.  
     into a toil?  
     it is but a shadow's shadow.  
     it means, say you this:  
     it not?  
     it. Adieu.  
     kill'd me.  
     king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.  
     kingdom. To-morrow shall I beg leave to see your kingly eyes;  
     kissing carrion- Have you a daughter?  
     know a hawk from a handsaw.  
     last king Hamlet overcame Fortinbras.  
     letters for him. Ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of    
     life,  
     liquor.  
     love passing well.  
     lowest note to the top of my compass; and there is much music,    
     make you at Elsinore?  
     make you ready.  
     man is twice a child.  
     man; good. If the man go to this water and drown himself, it is,  
     march. [Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,  
     master's daughter.  
     me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me.    
     me, whether you were sent for or no.    
     memory, and yet but yaw neither in respect of his quick sail.  
     might it not?  
     mind.  
     mine.  
     monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go; and quickly too.  
     more, ha?  
     much approve me. Well, sir?    
     musty.  
     my leave of you.  
     my mother. Therefore no more, but to the matter! My mother, you    
     nature: for anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing,    
     neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.  
     newly come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman,  
     not honesty to have it thus set down; for you yourself, sir,  
     not off.  
     not so wildly from my affair.  
     not the million, 'twas caviary to the general; but it was (as I  
     not to come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come:  
     not.  
     nowhere but in's own house. Farewell.  
     o'erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that I  
     occasion of my sudden and more strange return.  
     of a king?  
     of the fish that hath fed of that worm.  
     on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.  
     on't.  
     on, only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter-  
     one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England!  
     or bad but thinking makes it so. To me it is a prison.  
     or if it was, not above once; for the play, I remember, pleas'd    
     or, if 'a do not, 'tis no great matter there.  
     passionate action. The Poisoner with some three or four Mutes,  
     philosophy could find it out.  
     pick'd out of ten thousand.  
     pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me,  
     plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams. All which,  
     plunge him into far more choler.  
     pocky corses now-a-days that will scarce hold the laying in, I  
     pound! Didst perceive?  
     pray You Pass with your best violence;  
     promise-cramm'd. You cannot feed capons so.  
     purpose, confess thyself-  
     question more in particular. What have you, my good friends,  
     read, my lord?  
     reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I  
     remember. And there is pansies, that's for thoughts.  
     repair hither and say you are not fit.  
     reputation and profit, was better both ways.  
     say-  
     seeks her own salvation?  
     sense.  
     sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration? Impart.  
     shall be the end of my business.  
     shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose    
     shall see anon how the murtherer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.  
     shame and the odd hits.  
     shipwright, or the carpenter?  
     shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?  
     should be old as I am if, like a crab, you could go backward.    
     show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.  
     skull, the King's jester.  
     slow of sail, we put on a compelled valour, and in the grapple I  
     so. Three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy,  
     spent.  
     stopping a bunghole?  
     strumpet. What news ?  
     take longer time.  
     taste of your quality. Come, a passionate speech.  
     tell me one thing.  
     tenants.  
     the King.  
     the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.  
     the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.  
     the end. He keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw;  
     the guts of a beggar.  
     the only men.  
     the players ready.  
     the puppets dallying.  
     the readiness is all. Since no man knows aught of what he leaves,  
     the stair, into the lobby.  
     the top of mine) an excellent play, well digested in the scenes,  
     them shape, or time to act them in. What should such fellows as I  
     them to their trial-the bubbles are out,  
     there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury,  
     they are. To a nunnery, go.                            Exit.  
     they'll tell all.  
     they?  
     think how ill all's here about my heart. But it is no matter.  
     thirty years.  
     tongue? You will do't, sir, really.  
     top of my bent.- I will come by-and-by.  
     tragedians of the city.  
     tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral; scene    
     translate beauty into his likeness. This was sometime a paradox,  
     very liberal conceit.  
     visitation? Come, deal justly with me. Come, come! Nay, speak.  
     was converted) might they not stop a beer barrel?  
     waterfly?  
     went to cuffs in the question.  
     what is't to leave betimes? Let be.  
     what part a gentleman would see.  
     where my abridgment comes.  
     which this ass now o'erreaches; one that would circumvent God,  
     which was the model of that Danish seal;  
     will speak to this fellow. Whose grave's this, sirrah?  
     with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players (which I  
     within 's two hours.  
     world.  
     would perhaps trouble a woman.  
     would trace him, his umbrage, nothing more.  
     you cannot play upon me.  
     you i' th' earth three-and-twenty years.  
     you nine year.  
     your bounty. Take them in.  
     your friend.  
     your memory, begin at this line- let me see, let me see:  
     your name be Horatio, as I am let to know it is.  
     your table!  
    Will You walk out of the air, my lord?  
    You say right, sir; a Monday morning; twas so indeed.  
   1. Play. 'Anon he finds him,  
   1. Play. 'But who, O who, had seen the mobled queen-'  
   1. Play. Ay, my lord.  
   1. Play. Ay, my lord.  
   1. Play. What speech, my good lord?  
   A Gentleman, courtier.  
   A Norwegian Captain.  
   A Priest.  
   All. Gentlemen!  
   All. Lights, lights, lights!  
   All. No, let's come in!  
   All. Our duty to your honour.    
   All. Treason! treason!  
   All. We will, we will!  
   Ambassador. The sight is dismal;  
   Ber. 'Tis here!  
   Ber. 'Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.  
   Ber. Have you had quiet guard?  
   Ber. He.  
   Ber. How now, Horatio? You tremble and look pale.  
   Ber. I have seen nothing.  
   Ber. I think it be no other but e'en so.  
   Ber. In the same figure, like the King that's dead.    
   Ber. It was about to speak, when the cock crew.  
   Ber. It would be spoke to.  
   Ber. Last night of all,  
   Ber. Long live the King!  
   Ber. Looks it not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.  
   Ber. Say-  
   Ber. See, it stalks away!  
   Ber. Sit down awhile,  
   Ber. Welcome, Horatio. Welcome, good Marcellus.  
   Ber. Well, good night.  
   Ber. Who's there.?  
   Bernardo, officer.  
   Both [Mar. and Ber.] We do, my lord.  
   Both. Arm'd, my lord.  
   Both. Ay, by heaven, my lord.    
   Both. Longer, longer.  
   Both. My lord, from head to foot.  
   Both. My lord, we will not.  
   Both. We will haste us.  
   Both. We will, my lord.                       Exeunt they two.  
   Both. We'll wait upon you.    
   Capt. Against some part of Poland.    
   Capt. I will do't, my lord.  
   Capt. The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.  
   Capt. They are of Norway, sir.  
   Capt. Truly to speak, and with no addition,  
   Capt. Yes, it is already garrison'd.  
   Claudius, King of Denmark.  
   Clown. 'A was the first that ever bore arms.  
   Clown. 'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again from me to you.  
   Clown. (Sings)  
   Clown. (sings)  
   Clown. A whoreson, mad fellow's it was. Whose do you think it was?  
   Clown. Ay, marry, is't- crowner's quest law.  
   Clown. Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.  
   Clown. E'en that.  
   Clown. Faith, e'en with losing his wits.  
   Clown. For no man, sir.  
   Clown. For none neither.  
   Clown. I like thy wit well, in good faith. The gallows does well.  
   Clown. Mine, sir.  
   Clown. One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she's dead.  
   Clown. To't.  
   Clown. Very strangely, they say.  
   Clown. What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the Scripture?  
   Clown. Why, because 'a was mad. 'A shall recover his wits there;  
   Clown. Why, here in Denmark. I have been sexton here, man and boy    
   Clown. You lie out on't, sir, and therefore 'tis not yours.  
   Cor., Volt. In that, and all things, will we show our duty.  
   Cornelius, courtier.  
   English Ambassadors.  
   For. Go softly on.  
   For. Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.  
   Fort. Let us haste to hear it,    
   Fort. This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,  
   Fort. Where is this sight?  
   Fortinbras, Prince of Norway.    
   Fran. Bernardo hath my place.  
   Fran. Bernardo?  
   Fran. For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,  
   Fran. Give you good night.  
   Fran. I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?  
   Fran. Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.  
   Fran. Not a mouse stirring.  
   Fran. You come most carefully upon your hour.  
   Gent. She is importunate, indeed distract.  
   Gentlemen. (within) Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!  
   Getrude, Queen of Denmark, mother to Hamlet.  
   Ghost of Hamlet's Father.  
   Ghost. Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,  
   Ghost. I am thy father's spirit,  
   Ghost. I find thee apt;  
   Ghost. If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.  
   Ghost. Mark me.  
   Ghost. Murther most foul, as in the best it is;  
   Ghost. My hour is almost come,  
   Ghost. Revenge his foul and most unnatural murther.  
   Ghost. So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.  
   Ghost. Swear.  
   Ghost. [beneath] Swear by his sword.  
   Ghost. [beneath] Swear.  
   Ghost. [beneath] Swear.  
   Guil. A thing, my lord?  
   Guil. Believe me, I cannot.  
   Guil. But these cannot I command to any utt'rance of harmony. I  
   Guil. But we both obey,  
   Guil. But with much forcing of his disposition.  
   Guil. Faith, her privates we.  
   Guil. Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.  
   Guil. Happy in that we are not over-happy.  
   Guil. I know, no touch of it, my lord.  
   Guil. In what, my dear lord?  
   Guil. Is in his retirement, marvellous distemper'd.    
   Guil. My honour'd lord!  
   Guil. My lord, I cannot.  
   Guil. My lord, we were sent for.  
   Guil. Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed.  
   Guil. No, my lord; rather with choler.  
   Guil. Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,  
   Guil. O my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.  
   Guil. O, there has been much throwing about of brains.  
   Guil. Prison, my lord?    
   Guil. The King, sir-  
   Guil. There are the players.  
   Guil. We will ourselves provide.  
   Guil. What should we say, my lord?  
   Guil. What, my lord?  
   Guildenstern, courtier.  
   Ham.   A whole one I!  
   Ham.   Aha! Come, some music! Come, the recorders!  
   Ham.   Why, let the strucken deer go weep,  
   Ham. 'By-and-by' is easily said.- Leave me, friends.  
   Ham. 'Swounds, show me what thou't do.  
   Ham. 'The mobled queen'?  
   Ham. 'Tis very strange.  
   Ham. 'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of this soon.-  
   Ham. (within) Mother, mother, mother!  
   Ham. A bloody deed- almost as bad, good mother,  
   Ham. A dream itself is but a shadow.  
   Ham. A king of shreds and patches!-  
   Ham. A murtherer and a villain!  
   Ham. Aha boy, say'st thou so? Art thou there, truepenny?  
   Ham. Alas, poor ghost!  
   Ham. Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?  
   Ham. An earnest conjuration from the King,  
   Ham. And do still, by these pickers and stealers!  
   Ham. And fix'd his eyes upon you?  
   Ham. And smelt so? Pah!  
   Ham. And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.  
   Ham. Angels and ministers of grace defend us!  
   Ham. Are you fair?  
   Ham. Arm'd, say you?  
   Ham. As th'art a man,  
   Ham. As woman's love.  
   Ham. At supper.  
   Ham. Ay, lady, it was my word.  
   Ham. Ay, madam, it is common.  
   Ham. Ay, marry, is't;  
   Ham. Ay, marry, why was be sent into England?  
   Ham. Ay, sir, what of him?  
   Ham. Ay, sir; that soaks up the King's countenance, his rewards,    
   Ham. Ay, so, God b' wi' ye!  
   Ham. Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you;  
   Ham. Being thus benetted round with villanies,  
   Ham. Between who?  
   Ham. But soft! What noise? Who calls on Hamlet? O, here they come.  
   Ham. But where was this?  
   Ham. But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.  
   Ham. Buzz, buzz!  
   Ham. Come for the third, Laertes! You but dally.  
   Ham. Come on, sir.  
   Ham. Come, come, and sit you down. You shall not budge I  
   Ham. Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.  
   Ham. Denmark's a prison.  
   Ham. Did you not speak to it?  
   Ham. Do not believe it.  
   Ham. Do the boys carry it away?    
   Ham. Do you not come your tardy son to chide,  
   Ham. Do you see nothing there?  
   Ham. Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?  
   Ham. Do you think I meant country matters?  
   Ham. Does it not, thinks't thee, stand me now upon-  
   Ham. Dost thou think Alexander look'd o' this fashion i' th' earth?  
   Ham. Ecstasy?  
   Ham. Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.  
   Ham. Excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish. I eat the air,  
   Ham. Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play to-morrow.  
   Ham. For England?  
   Ham. For God's love let me hear!  
   Ham. For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god    
   Ham. From top to toe?  
   Ham. Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands, come! Th'  
   Ham. Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;  
   Ham. Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.  
   Ham. Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,  
   Ham. Good madam!  
   Ham. Good sir, whose powers are these?  
   Ham. Good.    
   Ham. Ha, ha! Are you honest?  
   Ham. Hark you, Guildenstern- and you too- at each ear a hearer!  
   Ham. He did comply with his dug before he suck'd it. Thus has he,  
   Ham. He poisons him i' th' garden for's estate. His name's Gonzago.    
   Ham. He was a man, take him for all in all.  
   Ham. He will stay till you come.  
   Ham. Hear you, sir!  
   Ham. Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee.  
   Ham. Here's the commission; read it at more leisure.  
   Ham. Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,  
   Ham. Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.  
   Ham. Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come.  
   Ham. His beard was grizzled- no?  
   Ham. Hold off your hands!  
   Ham. How came he mad?  
   Ham. How comes it? Do they grow rusty?  
   Ham. How does the Queen?  
   Ham. How if I answer no?  
   Ham. How is it with you, lady?  
   Ham. How long is that since?  
   Ham. How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?  
   Ham. How purpos'd, sir, I pray you?  
   Ham. How say you then? Would heart of man once think it?  
   Ham. How strangely?  
   Ham. I am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly I  
   Ham. I am constant to my purposes; they follow the King's pleasure.  
   Ham. I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.  
   Ham. I am glad to see you well.  
   Ham. I am sorry they offend you, heartily;  
   Ham. I am tame, sir; pronounce.  
   Ham. I am very glad to see you.- [To Bernardo] Good even, sir.-    
   Ham. I beseech you remember.  
   Ham. I dare not drink yet, madam; by-and-by.  
   Ham. I do beseech you.  
   Ham. I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe?  
   Ham. I embrace it freely,  
   Ham. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted;  
   Ham. I humbly thank you; well, well, well.  
   Ham. I mean, my head upon your lap?  
   Ham. I must to England; you know that?  
   Ham. I pray you.  
   Ham. I prithee do not mock me, fellow student.  
   Ham. I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for England!  
   Ham. I shall in all my best obey you, madam.  
   Ham. I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in't.  
   Ham. I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. Mark it.-  
   Ham. I will watch to-night.  
   Ham. I will.  
   Ham. I would I had been there.  
   Ham. I would not hear your enemy say so,  
   Ham. I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.    
   Ham. I'll play this bout first; set it by awhile.  
   Ham. If it assume my noble father's person,  
   Ham. If she should break it now!  
   Ham. If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague for thy dowry:  
   Ham. In happy time.  
   Ham. In my mind's eye, Horatio.  
   Ham. Indeed, indeed, sirs. But this troubles me.  
   Ham. Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.  
   Ham. Into my grave?  
   Ham. Is not parchment made of sheepskins?  
   Ham. Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?  
   Ham. Is't possible?  
   Ham. It shall to the barber's, with your beard.- Prithee say on.  
   Ham. It waves me still.  
   Ham. It will be short; the interim is mine,  
   Ham. It will not speak. Then will I follow it.  
   Ham. It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.  
   Ham. Judgment!  
   Ham. Lady, shall I lie in your lap?  
   Ham. Let me see. [Takes the skull.] Alas, poor Yorick! I knew him,    
   Ham. Look here upon th's picture, and on this,  
   Ham. Madam, how like you this play?  
   Ham. Marry, this is miching malhecho; it means mischief.    
   Ham. Methinks it is like a weasel.  
   Ham. Mother, you have my father much offended.  
   Ham. Murther?  
   Ham. My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern? Ah,  
   Ham. Nay come! again!                         The Queen falls.    
   Ham. Nay, I know not.  
   Ham. Nay, I know not. Is it the King?  
   Ham. Nay, but swear't.  
   Ham. Nay, do not think I flatter;  
   Ham. Nay, that follows not.  
   Ham. Never make known what you have seen to-night.  
   Ham. Never to speak of this that you have seen.  
   Ham. No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is northerly.  
   Ham. No, by the rood, not so!  
   Ham. No, by this bad.    
   Ham. No, good mother. Here's metal more attractive.  
   Ham. No, no! They do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i' th'  
   Ham. No, not I!  
   Ham. No, you will reveal it.  
   Ham. Nor did you nothing hear?  
   Ham. Nor the soles of her shoe?  
   Ham. Not so, my lord. I am too much i' th' sun.  
   Ham. Not this, by no means, that I bid you do:  
   Ham. Nothing.  
   Ham. Now might I do it pat, now he is praying;  
   Ham. Now, mother, what's the matter?  
   Ham. O God!  
   Ham. O God, your only jig-maker! What should a man do but be merry?  
   Ham. O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!  
   Ham. O all you host of heaven! O earth! What else?  
   Ham. O my prophetic soul!  
   Ham. O that this too too solid flesh would melt,  
   Ham. O villany! Ho! let the door be lock'd.  
   Ham. O, I die, Horatio!  
   Ham. O, but she'll keep her word.  
   Ham. O, horrible! O, horrible! most horrible!  
   Ham. O, throw away the worser part of it,  
   Ham. Of him, sir.  
   Ham. Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after.  
   Ham. On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares!  
   Ham. One.  
   Ham. Or like a whale.  
   Ham. Or of a courtier, which could say 'Good morrow, sweet lord!  
   Ham. Pale or red?  
   Ham. Rest, rest, perturbed spirit! So, gentlemen,  
   Ham. Safely stow'd.  
   Ham. Saw? who?  
   Ham. Seems, madam, Nay, it is. I know not 'seems.'  
   Ham. She well instructs me.  
   Ham. Sir, I cannot.  
   Ham. Sir, I lack advancement.  
   Ham. Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his Majesty,  
   Ham. Sir, a whole history.  
   Ham. Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you; though, I    
   Ham. Sir, my good friend- I'll change that name with you.  
   Ham. So be it!  
   Ham. So much for this, sir; now shall you see the other.  
   Ham. Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounc'd it to you,  
   Ham. Speak. I am bound to hear.  
   Ham. That is Laertes,  
   Ham. That's a fair thought to lie between maids' legs.  
   Ham. That's two of his weapons- but well.  
   Ham. The King doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,  
   Ham. The King my father?  
   Ham. The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.  
   Ham. The body is with the King, but the King is not with the body.  
   Ham. The point envenom'd too?  
   Ham. Then I would you were so honest a man.  
   Ham. Then came each actor on his ass-  
   Ham. Then saw you not his face?  
   Ham. There's another. Why may not that be the skull of a lawyer?  
   Ham. There's letters seal'd; and my two schoolfellows,  
   Ham. These tedious old fools!  
   Ham. They are coming to the play. I must be idle.    
   Ham. They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that. I    
   Ham. This likes me well. These foils have all a length?  
   Ham. This?  
   Ham. Thou pray'st not well.  
   Ham. To be, or not to be- that is the question:  
   Ham. To this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will.  
   Ham. Up from my cabin,  
   Ham. Upon my sword.  
   Ham. Upon the talk of the poisoning?  
   Ham. Upon what ground?  
   Ham. Very like, very like. Stay'd it long?    
   Ham. Very well, my lord.  
   Ham. Very well. Follow that lord- and look you mock him not.  
   Ham. We shall know by this fellow. The players cannot keep counsel;  
   Ham. Well said, old mole! Canst work i' th' earth so fast?  
   Ham. Well, God-a-mercy.  
   Ham. What call you the carriages?  
   Ham. What did you enact?  
   Ham. What hour now?  
   Ham. What man dost thou dig it for?  
   Ham. What woman then?  
   Ham. What's his weapon?  
   Ham. What's the matter now?  
   Ham. What, frighted with false fire?  
   Ham. What, ho, Horatio!  
   Ham. What, look'd he frowningly.  
   Ham. What, the fair Ophelia?  
   Ham. What?  
   Ham. Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak! I'll go no further.  
   Ham. Who commands them, sir?  
   Ham. Who is to be buried in't?  
   Ham. Who, I?  
   Ham. Whose was it?  
   Ham. Why did you laugh then, when I said 'Man delights not me'?  
   Ham. Why he more than another?  
   Ham. Why,  
   Ham. Why,  
   Ham. Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.  
   Ham. Why, look you there! Look how it steals away!    
   Ham. Why, man, they did make love to this employment!  
   Ham. Why, right! You are in the right!  
   Ham. Why, then the Polack never will defend it.  
   Ham. Why, what should be the fear?  
   Ham. Why?  
   Ham. With drink, sir?  
   Ham. Words, words, words.  
   Ham. Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,  
   Ham. You are welcome.  
   Ham. Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.  
   Ham. [aside] A little more than kin, and less than kind!  
   Ham. [aside] Wormwood, wormwood!  
   Ham. [comes forward] What is he whose grief    
   Ham. [draws] How now? a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead!  
   Hamlet, son to the former, and nephew to the present king.  
   Hor. 'Tis here!  
   Hor. 'Twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.    
   Hor. (within) My lord, my lord!  
   Hor. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.  
   Hor. A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.  
   Hor. A piece of him.  
   Hor. A truant disposition, good my lord.  
   Hor. And then it started, like a guilty thing    
   Hor. As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true;    
   Hor. As thou art to thyself.  
   Hor. Ay, good my lord.  
   Hor. Ay, my lord, And of calveskins too.  
   Hor. Ay, my lord.  
   Hor. Be rul'd. You shall not go.  
   Hor. Custom hath made it in him a Property of easiness.  
   Hor. Do not, my lord!  
   Hor. Do, if it will not stand.  
   Hor. E'en so, my lord.  
   Hor. E'en so.  
   Hor. Friends to this ground.  
   Hor. Good my lord, be quiet.  
   Hor. Good my lord, tell it.  
   Hor. Hail to your lordship!  
   Hor. Half a share.  
   Hor. Have after. To what issue wail this come?  
   Hor. He waxes desperate with imagination.  
   Hor. Heaven secure him!  
   Hor. Heaven will direct it.  
   Hor. Here, sweet lord, at your service.  
   Hor. How was this seal'd?  
   Hor. I beseech you.  
   Hor. I did very well note him.  
   Hor. I saw him once. He was a goodly king.    
   Hor. I think it lacks of twelve.  
   Hor. I warr'nt it will.  
   Hor. In faith,  
   Hor. In what particular thought to work I know not;  
   Hor. Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.  
   Hor. Is it a custom?  
   Hor. Is't possible?  
   Hor. It beckons you to go away with it,  
   Hor. It is a nipping and an eager air.  
   Hor. It might, my lord.  
   Hor. It was, as I have seen it in his life,  
   Hor. It would have much amaz'd you.  
   Hor. Let him bless thee too.  
   Hor. Let them come in.  
   Hor. Look, my lord, it comes!  
   Hor. Most constantly.  
   Hor. Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.  
   Hor. My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.  
   Hor. My lord, I did;  
   Hor. My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.  
   Hor. My lord, the King your father.  
   Hor. Nay, good my lord -  
   Hor. Nay, very pale.  
   Hor. Never believe it.  
   Hor. No, by no means!  
   Hor. Not I, my lord, by heaven!  
   Hor. Not a jot more, my lord.  
   Hor. Not from his mouth,  
   Hor. Not when I saw't.  
   Hor. Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,  
   Hor. O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!  
   Hor. O, my dear lord!  
   Hor. O, where, my lord?  
   Hor. O, yes, my lord! He wore his beaver up.  
   Hor. Of that I shall have also cause to speak,  
   Hor. Peace! Who comes here?  
   Hor. Propose the oath, my lord.    
   Hor. Remember it, my lord!  
   Hor. So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to't.  
   Hor. So have I heard and do in part believe it.  
   Hor. Stay! Speak, speak! I charge thee speak!  
   Hor. That can I.  
   Hor. That is most certain.  
   Hor. The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.  
   Hor. There's no offence, my lord.  
   Hor. These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.  
   Hor. They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?  
   Hor. This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.    
   Hor. Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.  
   Hor. Very well, my lord.  
   Hor. Well, my lord.  
   Hor. Well, sit we down,  
   Hor. What are they that would speak with me?  
   Hor. What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,  
   Hor. What is it you will see?  
   Hor. What is't, my lord? We will.  
   Hor. What news, my lord?  
   Hor. What's that, my lord?  
   Hor. While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.  
   Hor. Why, what a king is this!  
   Hor. You might have rhym'd.  
   Hor. You will lose this wager, my lord.  
   Hor. [aside to Hamlet] No, my good lord.  
   Horatio, friend to Hamlet.  
   King. 'Tis Hamlet's character. 'Naked!'  
   King. 'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,  
   King. A Norman.  
   King. A very riband in the cap of youth-  
   King. Alas, alas!  
   King. Arm you, I pray you, to th', speedy voyage;  
   King. As of a man faithful and honourable.  
   King. At supper? Where?  
   King. Ay, Hamlet.  
   King. Bring him before us.  
   King. But where is he?  
   King. Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.  
   King. Conceit upon her father.  
   King. Dead.  
   King. Do you think 'tis this?  
   King. Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.  
   King. Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.  
   King. From Hamlet? Who brought them?  
   King. Gertrude, do not drink.  
   King. Give me some light! Away!  
   King. Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,  
   King. Good Laertes,  
   King. Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety,-  
   King. Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in't?  
   King. Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?  
   King. He made confession of you;  
   King. How do you, pretty lady?  
   King. How fares our cousin Hamlet?  
   King. How is it that the clouds still hang on you?  
   King. How long hath she been thus?  
   King. How may we try it further?  
   King. I do not fear it, I have seen you both;  
   King. I do not think't.  
   King. I have sent to seek him and to find the body.  
   King. I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.  
   King. It falls right.  
   King. It likes us well;  
   King. It shall be so.  
   King. Laertes, I must commune with your grief,  
   King. Laertes, was your father dear to you?  
   King. Laertes, you shall hear them.  
   King. Let him demand his fill.  
   King. Let's follow, Gertrude.    
   King. Let's further think of this,  
   King. Love? his affections do not that way tend;    
   King. No place indeed should murther sanctuarize;  
   King. Not that I know.  
   King. Not that I think you did not love your father;  
   King. Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,  
   King. Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?  
   King. O Gertrude, come away!  
   King. O heavy deed!  
   King. O, for two special reasons,  
   King. O, he is mad, Laertes.  
   King. O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.  
   King. O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.  
   King. Our son shall win.  
   King. Part them! They are incens'd.  
   King. Pluck thein asunder.  
   King. Pretty Ophelia!  
   King. Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.  
   King. She sounds to see them bleed.  
   King. So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.  
   King. So you shall;  
   King. Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine;  
   King. Sweet Gertrude, leave us too;  
   King. Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,  
   King. Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.  
   King. Thanks, dear my lord.  
   King. The doors are broke.  
   King. The very same.  
   King. Thou still hast been the father of good news.  
   King. Thy loving father, Hamlet.  
   King. Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.  
   King. We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.  
   King. We will try it.  
   King. Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.  
   King. Well, we shall sift him.  
   King. What do you call the play?  
   King. What dost thou mean by this?    
   King. What is the cause, Laertes,  
   King. What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?  
   King. Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.  
   King. Where is Polonius?  
   King. Who shall stay you?  
   King. Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.  
   King. Will you know them then?  
   King. [aside] It is the poison'd cup; it is too late.  
   King. [aside] O, 'tis too true!  
   King. [rises] My words fly up, my thoughts remain below.  
   Laer. A Norman was't?  
   Laer. A document in madness! Thoughts and remembrance fitted.  
   Laer. A touch, a touch; I do confess't.  
   Laer. Alas, then she is drown'd?  
   Laer. And so have I a noble father lost;  
   Laer. Ay my lord,  
   Laer. Come, my lord.                                They play.  
   Laer. Come, one for me.  
   Laer. Do you see this, O God?  
   Laer. Drown'd! O, where?  
   Laer. Farewell.                                          Exit.  
   Laer. For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favour,  
   Laer. Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,  
   Laer. Have at you now!  
   Laer. He is justly serv'd.  
   Laer. How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with:  
   Laer. How now? What noise is that?  
   Laer. I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come!  
   Laer. I am satisfied in nature,  
   Laer. I pray you give me leave.  
   Laer. I will do't!  
   Laer. It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain;  
   Laer. Know you the hand?  
   Laer. Lay her i' th' earth;  
   Laer. Let this be so.  
   Laer. Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.  
   Laer. Must there no more be done?  
   Laer. My dread lord,  
   Laer. My lord, I will be rul'd;  
   Laer. My lord, I'll hit him now.  
   Laer. My necessaries are embark'd. Farewell.  
   Laer. My will, not all the world!  
   Laer. No.  
   Laer. None but his enemies.  
   Laer. O, fear me not!  
   Laer. Say you so? Come on.                               Play.  
   Laer. That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard;  
   Laer. The devil take thy soul!  
   Laer. Think it no more.  
   Laer. This is too heavy; let me see another.  
   Laer. This nothing's more than matter.  
   Laer. Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,  
   Laer. To cut his throat i' th' church!  
   Laer. Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,  
   Laer. Upon my life, Lamound.  
   Laer. Well, again!  
   Laer. What ceremony else?  
   Laer. What ceremony else?  
   Laer. What out of this, my lord?  
   Laer. What part is that, my lord?  
   Laer. Where is my father?  
   Laer. Where is this king?- Sirs, staid you all without.  
   Laer. Why ask you this?  
   Laer. Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.  
   Laer. You mock me, sir.  
   Laer. [aside] And yet it is almost against my conscience.  
   Laertes, son to Polonius.  
   Lord. The King and Queen and all are coming down.  
   Lords, ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Sailors, Messengers, Attendants.  
   Mar. 'Tis gone and will not answer.  
   Mar. 'Tis gone!  
   Mar. And liegemen to the Dane.  
   Mar. Good now, sit down, and tell me he that knows,  
   Mar. Holla, Bernardo!  
   Mar. Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy,  
   Mar. How is't, my noble lord?  
   Mar. Illo, ho, ho, my lord!  
   Mar. Is it not like the King?  
   Mar. It faded on the crowing of the cock.  
   Mar. It is offended.  
   Mar. Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.  
   Mar. Lord Hamlet!  
   Mar. My good lord!  
   Mar. My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd.  
   Mar. Nay, let's follow him.  
   Mar. No, it is struck.  
   Mar. Nor I, my lord- in faith.  
   Mar. Nor I, my lord.  
   Mar. O, farewell, honest soldier.  
   Mar. O, wonderful!  
   Mar. Peace! break thee off! Look where it comes again!  
   Mar. Question it, Horatio.  
   Mar. Shall I strike at it with my partisan?  
   Mar. Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.  
   Mar. Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.  
   Mar. Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,  
   Mar. We have sworn, my lord, already.  
   Mar. What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?  
   Mar. You shall not go, my lord.  
   Marcellus, Officer.  
   Marcellus, officer.  
   Mess. Letters, my lord, from Hamlet:  
   Mess. Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not.  
   Mess. Save Yourself, my lord:  
   Oph. 'Tis brief, my lord.  
   Oph. 'Tis in my memory lock'd,  
   Oph. (Sings)  
   Oph. (sings)  
   Oph. (sings)  
   Oph. (sings)  
   Oph. And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,  
   Oph. At home, my lord.  
   Oph. Ay, my lord.  
   Oph. Ay, my lord.  
   Oph. Belike this show imports the argument of the play.  
   Oph. Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?  
   Oph. Do you doubt that?  
   Oph. Good my lord,  
   Oph. He took me by the wrist and held me hard;  
   Oph. I do not know, my lord, what I should think,  
   Oph. I shall obey, my lord.  
   Oph. I think nothing, my lord.  
   Oph. I was the more deceived.  
   Oph. Indeed, la, without an oath, I'll make an end on't!  
   Oph. Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.  
   Oph. Madam, I wish it may.  
   Oph. My honour'd lord, you know right well you did,  
   Oph. My lord, I do not know,  
   Oph. My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,  
   Oph. My lord?  
   Oph. Nay 'tis twice two months, my lord.  
   Oph. No more but so?  
   Oph. No, my good lord; but, as you did command,  
   Oph. No, my lord.  
   Oph. O heavenly powers, restore him!  
   Oph. O my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!  
   Oph. O, help him, you sweet heavens!  
   Oph. O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!  
   Oph. Pray you mark.  
   Oph. Say you? Nay, pray You mark.  
   Oph. So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.    
   Oph. Still better, and worse.  
   Oph. The King rises.  
   Oph. There's fennel for you, and columbines. There's rue for you,  
   Oph. There's rosemary, that's for remembrance. Pray you, love,  
   Oph. Well, God dild you! They say the owl was a baker's daughter.    
   Oph. What is, my lord?  
   Oph. What means this, my lord?  
   Oph. What means your lordship?  
   Oph. Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?  
   Oph. Will he tell us what this show meant?  
   Oph. You are as good as a chorus, my lord.  
   Oph. You are keen, my lord, you are keen.  
   Oph. You are merry, my lord.  
   Oph. You are naught, you are naught! I'll mark the play.  
   Oph. You must sing 'A-down a-down, and you call him a-down-a.' O,  
   Ophelia, daughter to Polonius.  
   Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit.  
   Osr. Ay, my good lord.  
   Osr. How is't, Laertes?  
   Osr. I commend my duty to your lordship.  
   Osr. I know you are not ignorant-  
   Osr. I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.  
   Osr. I thank your lordship, it is very hot.  
   Osr. It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.  
   Osr. Look to the Queen there, ho!  
   Osr. Nothing neither way.  
   Osr. Of Laertes?  
   Osr. Rapier and dagger.  
   Osr. Shall I redeliver you e'en so?  
   Osr. Sir?  
   Osr. The King, sir, hath wager'd with him six Barbary horses;  
   Osr. The carriages, sir, are the hangers.  
   Osr. You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is-  
   Osr. Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,  
   Osr. Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.  
   Osr. Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.  
   Osric, courtier.  
   Other. But is this law?  
   Other. Go to!  
   Other. I tell thee she is; therefore make her grave straight.  
   Other. Marry, now I can tell!  
   Other. Mass, I cannot tell.  
   Other. Nay, but hear you, Goodman Delver!  
   Other. The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand    
   Other. Was he a gentleman?  
   Other. Why, 'tis found so.  
   Other. Why, he had none.  
   Player. I hope we have reform'd that indifferently with us, sir.  
   Player. I warrant your honour.  
   Players.  
   Pol. 'And in part him, but,' you may say, 'not well.  
   Pol. 'Tis most true;  
   Pol. Affection? Pooh! You speak like a green girl,  
   Pol. And let him ply his music.  
   Pol. And the Queen too, and that presently.  
   Pol. And then, sir, does 'a this- 'a does- What was I about to say?  
   Pol. At 'closes in the consequence'- Ay, marry!  
   Pol. At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.  
   Pol. Ay, fashion you may call it. Go to, go to!  
   Pol. Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,  
   Pol. Ay, springes to catch woodcocks! I do know,  
   Pol. By th' mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.  
   Pol. Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.  
   Pol. Come, sirs.  
   Pol. Do you know me, my lord?  
   Pol. Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.  
   Pol. Fare you well, my lord.  
   Pol. Farewell!  
   Pol. Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.  
   Pol. Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.  
   Pol. Give o'er the play.  
   Pol. God b' wi' ye, fare ye well!  
   Pol. Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.     [Reads.]    
   Pol. Hath there been such a time- I would fain know that-  
   Pol. Have I, my lord? Assure you, my good liege,  
   Pol. He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.  
   Pol. Honest, my lord?  
   Pol. I have, my lord.  
   Pol. I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.  
   Pol. I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.  
   Pol. I will say so.                                      Exit.  
   Pol. I would fain prove so. But what might you think,    
   Pol. If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter that I  
   Pol. It is back'd like a weasel.  
   Pol. Mad for thy love?    
   Pol. Madam, I swear I use no art at all.  
   Pol. Marry, sir, here's my drift,  
   Pol. Marry, well bethought!  
   Pol. Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,  
   Pol. My lord, I have news to tell you.  
   Pol. My lord, I will use them according to their desert.  
   Pol. My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.  
   Pol. My lord, the Queen would speak with you, and presently.  
   Pol. Not I, my lord.  
   Pol. Observe his inclination in yourself.    
   Pol. Ophelia, walk you here.- Gracious, so please you,  
   Pol. Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,  
   Pol. That did I, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.  
   Pol. That hath made him mad.  
   Pol. That's good! 'Mobled queen' is good.  
   Pol. That's very true, my lord.  
   Pol. The actors are come hither, my lord.  
   Pol. The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy,  
   Pol. The time invites you. Go, your servants tend.  
   Pol. This business is well ended.  
   Pol. This is too long.  
   Pol. Upon my honour-  
   Pol. Very like a whale.  
   Pol. Well be with you, gentlemen!  
   Pol. What do you think of me?  
   Pol. What follows then, my lord?  
   Pol. What is the matter, my lord?  
   Pol. What is't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?  
   Pol. What said he?  
   Pol. What treasure had he, my lord?  
   Pol. Wherefore should you do this?  
   Pol. With what, i' th' name of God I  
   Pol. Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!  
   Pol. You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.  
   Pol. You shall do marvell's wisely, good Reynaldo,  
   Pol. [aside] Still on my daughter.  
   Pol. [aside] Though this be madness, yet there is a method in't.-  
   Pol. [behind] O, I am slain!  
   Pol. [behind] What, ho! help, help, help!  
   Pol. [to the King] O, ho! do you mark that?  
   Polonius, Lord Chamberlain.  
   Priest. No more be done.  
   Queen. Alack,  
   Queen. Alack, what noise is this?  
   Queen. Alas, he's mad!  
   Queen. Alas, how is't with you,    
   Queen. Alas, look here, my lord!  
   Queen. Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?  
   Queen. As kill a king?  
   Queen. Ay me, what act,  
   Queen. Ay, amen!  
   Queen. Be thou assur'd, if words be made of breath,  
   Queen. Bestow this place on us a little while.  
   Queen. But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.  
   Queen. But not by him!  
   Queen. Calmly, good Laertes.  
   Queen. Came this from Hamlet to her?  
   Queen. Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.  
   Queen. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.  
   Queen. Come, let me wipe thy face.  
   Queen. Did he receive you well?  
   Queen. Did you assay him    
   Queen. Drown'd, drown'd.  
   Queen. For love of God, forbear him!  
   Queen. Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,  
   Queen. Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you,  
   Queen. Hamlet, Hamlet!  
   Queen. Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.  
   Queen. Have you forgot me?  
   Queen. He's fat, and scant of breath.  
   Queen. How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!    
   Queen. How fares my lord?  
   Queen. How now, Ophelia?  
   Queen. I doubt it is no other but the main,  
   Queen. I shall obey you;  
   Queen. I will not speak with her.  
   Queen. I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.          Drinks.  
   Queen. I'll warrant you; fear me not. Withdraw; I hear him coming.  
   Queen. If it be,  
   Queen. Let her come in.    
   Queen. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.  
   Queen. More matter, with less art.  
   Queen. Nay, but Ophelia-  
   Queen. Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.  
   Queen. No more!  
   Queen. No, no! the drink, the drink! O my dear Hamlet!  
   Queen. No, nothing but ourselves.  
   Queen. Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.  
   Queen. O Hamlet, speak no more!  
   Queen. O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.  
   Queen. O me, what hast thou done?  
   Queen. O my son, what theme?    
   Queen. O, speak to me no more!  
   Queen. O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!  
   Queen. One woe doth tread upon another's heel,  
   Queen. So he does indeed.  
   Queen. Sweets to the sweet! Farewell.  
   Queen. Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.    
   Queen. The lady doth protest too much, methinks.  
   Queen. There is a willow grows aslant a brook,  
   Queen. This is mere madness;  
   Queen. This is the very coinage of your brain.  
   Queen. To draw apart the body he hath kill'd;  
   Queen. To whom do you speak this?  
   Queen. What shall I do?  
   Queen. What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murther me?  
   Queen. What would she have?  
   Queen. Why, how now, Hamlet?    
   Queen. it may be, very like.  
   Rey. As gaming, my lord.  
   Rey. At 'closes in the consequence,' at 'friend or so,' and    
   Rey. Ay, my lord,  
   Rey. Ay, very well, my lord.    
   Rey. But, my good lord-  
   Rey. I shall, my lord.  
   Rey. I will, my lord.  
   Rey. My lord, I did intend it.  
   Rey. My lord, I have.  
   Rey. My lord, that would dishonour him.  
   Rey. Very good, my lord.  
   Rey. Well, my lord.  
   Reynaldo, servant to Polonius.  
   Ros. As the indifferent children of the earth.  
   Ros. Ay, my lord. They stay upon your patience.  
   Ros. Ay, that they do, my lord- Hercules and his load too.  
   Ros. Believe what?  
   Ros. Good my lord!  
   Ros. He does confess he feels himself distracted,  
   Ros. Ho, Guildenstern! Bring in my lord.  
   Ros. I understand you not, my lord.  
   Ros. Most like a gentleman.  
   Ros. My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.    
   Ros. My lord, you once did love me.  
   Ros. My most dear lord!  
   Ros. Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there is,  
   Ros. Neither, my lord.  
   Ros. No indeed are they not.    
   Ros. None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.  
   Ros. She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed.  
   Ros. Take you me for a sponge, my lord?  
   Ros. Then is the world one.  
   Ros. To visit you, my lord; no other occasion.  
   Ros. To what end, my lord?  
   Ros. We shall, my lord.  
   Ros. We think not so, my lord.  
   Ros. What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?  
   Ros. Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord,  
   Ros. Will't please you go, my lord?  
   Ros. Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.  
   Ros. [aside to Guildenstern] What say you?  
   Ros. [to Polonius] God save you, sir!  
   Rosencrantz, courtier.  
   Sailor. 'A shall, sir, an't please him. There's a letter for you,  
   Sailor. God bless you, sir.  
   Servant. Seafaring men, sir. They say they have letters for you.  
   Two Clowns, gravediggers.  
   Volt. Most fair return of greetings and desires.  
   Voltemand, courtier.  
  and then, you know,  
 A room in the Castle.  
 ACT I. Scene I.  
 ACT III. Scene I.  
 ACT IV. Scene I.  
 ACT V. Scene I.  
 Act II. Scene I.  
 Elsinore. A churchyard.  
 Elsinore. A hall in the Castle.  
 Elsinore. A passage in the Castle.  
 Elsinore. A platform before the Castle.  
 Elsinore. A room in the Castle.  
 Elsinore. A room in the Castle.  
 Elsinore. A room in the Castle.  
 Elsinore. A room in the Castle.  
 Elsinore. A room in the Castle.  
 Elsinore. A room in the house of Polonius.  
 Elsinore. A room in the house of Polonius.  
 Elsinore. A room of state in the Castle.  
 Elsinore. Another room in the Castle.  
 Elsinore. Another room in the Castle.  
 Elsinore. The Castle. Another part of the fortifications.  
 Elsinore. The platform before the Castle.  
 Elsinore. hall in the Castle.  
 Enter Fortinbras with his Army over the stage.  
 Enter Ghost and Hamlet.  
 Enter Hamlet and Horatio.  
 Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.  
 Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.  
 Enter Hamlet.  
 Enter Horatio with an Attendant.  
 Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.  
 Enter King and Laertes.  
 Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.  
 Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and Lords.  
 Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.  
 Enter King.  
 Enter Laertes and Ophelia.  
 Enter Polonius and Reynaldo.  
 Enter Queen and Polonius.  
 Enter two Clowns, [with spades and pickaxes].  
 Exit.  
 Exit.  
 Exit.  
 Exit.  
 Exit.  
 Flourish. [Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the Queen, Hamlet,  
 Flourish. [Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, cum aliis.  
 Lords Attendant.  
 Near Elsinore.  
 SCENE.- Elsinore.  
 Scene II.  
 Scene II.  
 Scene II.  
 Scene II.  
 Scene II.  
 Scene III.  
 Scene III.  
 Scene III.  
 Scene IV.  
 Scene IV.  
 Scene IV.  
 Scene V.  
 Scene V.  
 Scene VI.  
 Scene VII.  
 THE END  
 The Queen's closet.  
 at his post; then] Bernardo, [who approaches him].  
 THE TRAGEDY OF HAMLET, PRINCE OF DENMARK  
                                                          grave.]  
                                                         [Reads.]  
                                                     [Exit Lord.]  
                                                    [Exit Queen.]  
                                                    [They swear.]  
                                                  [March within.]  
                                                 [Exit Polonius.]  
                                                 [Gives a paper.]  
                                                 [Laertes falls.]  
                                                [Exit Attendant.]  
                                                [Exit Gentleman.]  
                                              [Scatters flowers.]  
                                             [Exeunt Attendants.]  
                                             [Exit First Player.]  
                                             [Throws up a skull.]  
                                           [Puts down the skull.]  
                                         [Exeunt all but Hamlet.]  
                               [Polonius hides behind the arras.]  
                             Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern]  
                            [Hamlet moves him to put on his hat.]  
                           [Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]  
                          [Lifts up the arras and sees Polonius.]  
                     [The King puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.]  
              Queen, Laertes, with Lords attendant.]  
             Exeunt marching; after the which a peal of ordnance  
             Let in the maid, that out a maid  
          Now is be total gules, horridly trick'd  
       A second time I kill my husband dead  
       Guildenstern, and other Lords attendant, with the Guard  
       Honour'd, belov'd, and haply one as kind  
       The instant burst of clamour that she made  
       This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange  
       We beg your hearing patiently.                     [Exit.]  
       Which was declining on the milky head  
       Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd  
       With bisson rheum; a clout upon that head  
       With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword  
     'Swounds, I should take it! for it cannot be  
     'Tis too much prov'd, that with devotion's visage  
     'To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most beautified  
     (for the most part) are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb  
     A combination and a form indeed  
     A little month, or ere those shoes were old  
     A minist'ring angel shall my sister be  
     And both neglect. What if this cursed hand  
     And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee  
     And each particular hair to stand an end  
     And for his death no wind  
     And let all sleep, while to my shame I see  
     And let me speak to the yet unknowing world  
     And therefore must his choice be circumscrib'd  
     And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge  
     And what's untimely done. [So haply slander-]  
     And with his head over his shoulder turn'd  
     And with such coz'nage- is't not perfect conscience  
     And with them words of so sweet breath compos'd  
     And you must needs have heard, how I am punish'd  
     As false as dicers' oaths. O, such a deed  
     As had he been incorps'd and demi-natur'd  
     As he in his particular act and place  
     At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.        [Writes.]  
     But better look'd into, he truly found  
     But if't be he I mean, he's very wild  
     But it reserv'd some quantity of choice  
     But this eternal blazon must not be  
     But to recover of us, by strong hand  
     But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed  
     By heaven, it is as proper to our age  
     Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed  
     Conjures the wand'ring stars, and makes them stand  
     Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood  
     Even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance  
     Fall ten times treble on that cursed head  
     Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide  
     Fie upon't! foh! About, my brain! Hum, I have heard  
     For by the image of my cause I see  
     For look you how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died  
     For that which thou hast done,- must send thee hence  
     Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee  
     Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walk'd  
     Good gentlemen, give him a further edge  
     Have heaven and earth together demonstrated  
     He falls to such perusal of my face  
     He hath not fail'd to pester us with message  
     He rais'd a sigh so piteous and profound  
     He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found  
     His nephew's levies; which to him appear'd  
     Hoist with his own petar; and 't shall go hard  
     Horatio. A fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy. He  
     I could a tale unfold whose lightest word  
     I did repel his letters and denied  
     I do not know from what part of the world  
     I have a voice and precedent of peace  
     I'll call upon you ere you go to bed  
     I, his sole son, do this same villain send  
     If by direct or by collateral hand  
     If circumstances lead me, I will find  
     If his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now or whensoever, provided  
     Importing health and graveness. Two months since  
     In hugger-mugger to inter him; Poor Ophelia  
     In the corrupted currents of this world  
     It shall as level to your judgment pierce  
     It will be laid to us, whose providence  
     King. Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round  
     Let come what comes; only I'll be reveng'd  
     Let not the royal bed of Denmark be  
     My brother shall know of it; and so I thank you for your good  
     My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France  
     No more; and by a sleep to say we end  
     Nor sense to ecstacy was ne'er so thrall'd  
     Nor shall you do my ear that violence  
     Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead  
     Of these dilated articles allow.            [Gives a paper.]  
     Of your dear father's death, is't writ in Your revenge  
     On such regards of safety and allowance  
     Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life  
     Or like a creature native and indued  
     Our hasty sending. Something have you heard  
     Put your dread pleasures more into command  
     She should in ground unsanctified have lodg'd  
     Should have a back or second, that might hold  
     Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice  
     Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red  
     Stood challenger on mount of all the age  
     T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head  
     Take these again; for to the noble mind  
     Taken to wife; nor have we herein barr'd  
     That cannot be; since I am still possess'd  
     That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound  
     That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed  
     That looks so many fadoms to the sea  
     That so his sickness, age, and impotence  
     That to the use of actions fair and good  
     The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand  
     The drink, the drink! I am poison'd.                 [Dies.]  
     The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead  
     The lists, and full proportions are all made  
     The memory be green, and that it us befitted  
     The serpent that did sting thy father's life  
     The source of this our watch, and the chief head  
     The youth you breathe of guilty, be assur'd  
     Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England  
     Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand  
     Till of this flat a mountain you have made  
     To fust in us unus'd. Now, whether it be  
     To have prov'd most royally; and for his passage  
     To keep it from divulging, let it feed  
     To keep those many many bodies safe  
     To quit him with this arm? And is't not to be damn'd  
     To show yourself your father's son in deed  
     To tell him his commandment is fulfill'd  
     To tell my story.         [March afar off, and shot within.]  
     Unbated and envenom'd. The foul practice  
     Unto that element; but long it could not be  
     Upon a fearful summons. I have heard  
     Upon whose property and most dear life  
     Was gaged by our king; which had return'd  
     We go to gain a little patch of ground  
     We may of their encounter frankly judge  
     We should profane the service of the dead  
     We'll put on those shall praise your excellence  
     Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed  
     Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled  
     Will sate itself in a celestial bed  
     With all the strength and armour of the mind  
     Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib  
     You are welcome, masters; welcome, all.- I am glad to see thee  
     You cannot call it love; for at your age  
     [Sings] O, a pit of clay for to be made  
     a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and  
     anything we see. We'll have a speech straight. Come, give us a  
     chronicles of the time. After your death you were better have a  
     crown, kisses it, pours poison in the sleeper's ears, and  
     fortunes turn Turk with me-with two Provincial roses on my raz'd  
     full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and  
     great showing. Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card  
     grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance  
     hath borne me on his back a thousand tunes. And now how abhorred  
     have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and  
     holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy. There was, for a  
     it is the breathing time of day with me. Let the foils be  
     journeymen had made men, and not made them well, they imitated  
     lungs are tickle o' th' sere; and the lady shall say her mind  
     obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a  
     of his action of battery? Hum! This fellow might be in's time a  
     only emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else to fat us, and  
     purging thick amber and plum-tree gum; and that they have a  
     rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and  
     set down with as much modesty as cunning. I remember one said  
     speak. 'Sblood, do you think I am easier to be play'd on than a  
     speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which I would set down and  
     the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not to come', if it be  
     them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goosequills and  
     to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a  
     vice to know him. He hath much land, and fertile. Let a beast be  
     wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no more on't! it hath made  
     whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and beget a  
     work; but what o' that? Your Majesty, and we that have free  
     would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would  
     yet? Then there's hope a great man's memory may outlive his life  
     you not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free  
   Capt. God b' wi' you, sir.                             [Exit.]  
   Ham. A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and  
   Ham. I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see  
   Ham. I'll be your foil, Laertes. In mine ignorance  
   Ham. In the secret parts of Fortune? O! most true! she is a  
   Ham. It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of Denmark, and  
   Ham. It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. Be  
   Ham. No, nor mine now. [To Polonius] My lord, you play'd once  
   Ham. O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a  
   Ham. O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a thousand  
   Ham. So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for I'll have a  
   Ham. That I can keep your counsel, and not mine own. Besides, to be  
   Ham. The phrase would be more germane to the matter if we could  
   Ham. Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretch'd  
   Ham. We'll ha't to-morrow night. You could, for a need, study a  
   Ham. Why, anything- but to th' purpose. You were sent for; and  
   Ham. Why, e'en so! and now my Lady Worm's, chapless, and knock'd  
   Ham. Why, then 'tis none to you; for there is nothing either good  
   Ham. [aside to Horatio] Thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a  
   Ham. [aside] Nay then, I have an eye of you.- If you love me, hold  
   Hor. (reads the letter) 'Horatio, when thou shalt have overlook'd  
   Hor. It must be shortly known to him from England  
   King. And can you by no drift of circumstance  
   King. Go seek him there. [To Attendants.]  
   King. To thine own peace. If he be now return'd  
   Laer. I know him well. He is the broach indeed  
   Laer. I thank you. Keep the door.      [Exeunt his Followers.]  
   Other. Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a  
   Other. Will you ha' the truth an't? If this had not been a  
   Pol. Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good  
   Priest. Her obsequies have been as far enlarg'd  
   Queen. Mad as the sea and wind when both contend  
   Rey. Good my lord!                                    [Going.]  
   Ros. Happily he's the second time come to them; for they say an old  
   Ros. Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence  
   Ros. The single and peculiar life is bound  
 Polonius, Laertes and his sister Ophelia, [Voltemand, Cornelius,]  
 Dramatis Personae  
                  Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, [with some  
              [The Attendants part them, and they come out of the  
          Black as his purpose, did the night resemble  
          Of Jove himself; and now reigns here  
       My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile  
     A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe  
     And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose  
     And I do think- or else this brain of mine  
     And breath of life, I have no life to breathe  
     And do't the speedier that you may direct me  
     And set a double varnish on the fame  
     And to such wondrous doing brought his horse  
     As if it some impartment did desire  
     As to expend your time with us awhile  
     Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone  
     Away! for everything is seal'd and done  
     Before You visit him, to make inquire  
     Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple  
     Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me  
     But sure the bravery of his grief did put me  
     Calls virtue hypocrite; takes off the rose  
     Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense  
     Exposing what is mortal and unsure  
     For food and diet, to some enterprise  
     For in that sleep of death what dreams may come  
     For nature crescent does not grow alone  
     Hamlet comes back. What would you undertake  
     Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blest are those  
     Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre  
     Have by the very cunning of the scene  
     Have you so slander any moment leisure  
     Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home  
     How all occasions do inform against me  
     How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable  
     Hunts not the trail of policy so sure  
     I had not quoted him. I fear'd he did but trifle  
     I made to her in marriage, and to decline  
     I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape  
     If his chief good and market of his time  
     Like Niobe, all tears- why she, even she  
     Makes vow before his uncle never more  
     Making night hideous, and we fools of nature  
     My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time  
     Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole  
     O good Horatio, what a wounded name  
     O'er whom his very madness, like some ore  
     Of each new-hatch'd, unfledg'd comrade. Beware  
     Or but a sickly part of one true sense  
     Or with a little shuffling, you may choose  
     Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty, these are  
     Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me  
     That for a fantasy and trick of fame  
     That from a shelf the precious diadem stole  
     That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature  
     That he, as 'twere by accident, may here  
     That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; 'beautified' is a vile  
     The need we have to use you did provoke  
     The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune  
     The terms of our estate may not endure  
     There with fantastic garlands did she come  
     They clip us drunkards and with swinish phrase  
     Thou com'st in such a questionable shape  
     Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature  
     To England send him; or confine him where  
     To business with the King, more than the scope  
     To keep itself from noyance; but much more  
     To keep my name ungor'd. But till that time  
     To let this canker of our nature come  
     To reason most absurd, whose common theme  
     Transports his poisoned shot- may miss our name  
     Well may it sort that this portentous figure  
     When he himself might his quietus make  
     When yond same star that's westward from the pole  
     Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense  
     With sore distraction. What I have done  
     Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature  
     You cannot speak of reason to the Dane  
     You must not take for fire. From this time  
     action how like an angel! in apprehension how like a god! the  
     and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were  
     and we had the trick to see't. Did these bones cost no more the  
     article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness as, to make  
     be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape  
     carried away. The Poisoner wooes the Queen with gifts; she  
     earth; of earth we make loam; and why of that loam (whereto he  
     end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose  
     freely, or the blank verse shall halt fort. What players are  
     half a year. But, by'r Lady, he must build churches then; or else  
     him and my daughter.- My honourable lord, I will most humbly take  
     his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine  
     in my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung those  
     is but variable service- two dishes, but to one table. That's the  
     ladyship is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last by the  
     me mad. I say, we will have no moe marriages. Those that are  
     of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the  
     put another question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the  
     seems to me a sterile promontory; this most excellent canopy, the  
     tell you must show fairly outwards) should more appear like  
     temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the  
     thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the  
     true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror, and who else  
     uncurrent gold, be not crack'd within the ring.- Masters, you are  
     when I shall (first asking your pardon thereunto) recount the  
     you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me  
   Clown. Cannot you tell that? Every fool can tell that. It was the  
   Clown. Give me leave. Here lies the water; good. Here stands the  
   Clown. What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the  
   Ham. 'The Mousetrap.' Marry, how? Tropically. This play is the  
   Ham. Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the  
   Ham. That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once. How the  
   Ham. The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the gentleman in our more  
   Ham. Then is doomsday near! But your news is not true. Let me  
   Ham. Then will I come to my mother by-and-by.- They fool me to the  
   Ham. Why, I will fight with him upon this theme  
   Ham. You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I will more  
   Hor. Season your admiration for a while  
   Hor. [aside] His purse is empty already. All's golden words are  
   King. But how hath she  
   King. With all my heart, and it doth much content me  
   Laer. It well appears. But tell me  
   Laer. O, treble woe  
   Ros. Even those you were wont to take such delight in, the  
 by William Shakespeare  
                             [Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern  
                   [Exit the Queen. Then] Exit Hamlet, tugging in  
          By his cockle bat and' staff  
          They bore him barefac'd on the bier  
          Which bewept to the grave did not go  
       'O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers; I have not art to  
       And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall  
       And thirty dozed moons with borrowed sheen  
       As hush as death- anon the dreadful thunder  
       Our wills and fates do so contrary run  
       Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top  
       Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash  
       Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven  
     'This must be so.' We pray you throw to earth  
     'Tis told me he hath very oft of late  
     (Marcellus and Bernardo) on their watch  
     (My fears forgetting manners) to unseal  
     (O God! a beast that wants discourse of reason  
     A baseness to write fair, and labour'd much  
     A broken voice, and his whole function suiting  
     A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak  
     A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards  
     A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark  
     A thought which, quarter'd, hath but one part wisdom  
     Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds  
     According to the phrase or the addition  
     Addicted so and so'; and there put on him  
     After the Danish sword, and thy free awe  
     And I'll be plac'd so please you, in the ear  
     And after we will both our judgments join  
     And could of men distinguish, her election  
     And do not spread the compost on the weeds  
     And for my means, I'll husband them so well  
     And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish  
     And he not from his reason fall'n thereon  
     And in the morn and liquid dew of youth  
     And in the porches of my ears did pour  
     And let me wring your heart; for so I shall  
     And let them know both what we mean to do  
     And makes us rather bear those ills we have  
     And my imaginations are as foul  
     And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch  
     And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself  
     And sure I am two men there are not living  
     And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands  
     And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepar'd him  
     And that his soul may be as damn'd and black  
     And that your Grace hath screen'd and stood between  
     And there assume some other, horrible form  
     And they in France of the best rank and station  
     And thus the native hue of resolution  
     And thy commandment all alone shall live  
     And to the manner born, it is a custom  
     And wants not buzzers to infect his ear  
     And we beseech you, bend you to remain  
     And we shall jointly labour with your soul  
     And why such daily cast of brazen cannon  
     And will not let belief take hold of him  
     And with a larger tether may he walk  
     And with no less nobility of love  
     And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken  
     And, as I think, they have already order  
     And, in this upshot, purposes mistook  
     Anon, as patient as the female dove  
     Appears before them and with solemn march  
     As are companions noted and most known  
     As if he had been loosed out of hell  
     As if increase of appetite had grown  
     As it did seem to shatter all his bulk  
     As of a father; for let the world take note  
     As oft as any passion under heaven  
     As peace should still her wheaten garland wear  
     Behind the arras I'll convey myself  
     But I am pigeon-liver'd and lack gall  
     But on! Six Barbary horses against six French swords, their  
     But with a crafty madness keeps aloof  
     But yet to me they are strong. The Queen his mother  
     By this encompassment and drift of question  
     Carve for himself, for on his choice depends  
     Christians, nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so  
     Collected from all simples that have virtue  
     Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends  
     Comes armed through our watch, so like the King  
     Craves the conveyance of a promis'd march  
     Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown  
     Denmark?- What, my young lady and mistress? By'r Lady, your  
     Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands  
     Did not together pluck such envy from him  
     Disasters in the sun; and the moist star  
     Do not for ever with thy vailed lids  
     Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play 'The Murther of  
     Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste  
     Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Osric, and Lords, with other  
     Enter a King and a Queen very lovingly; the Queen embracing  
     Even with the very comment of thy soul  
     Extorted treasure in the womb of earth  
     Fie on't! ah, fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden  
     For 'tis the sport to have the enginer  
     For murther, though it have no tongue, will speak  
     For out o' doors he went without their help  
     For what we know must be, and is as common  
     From that particular fault. The dram of e'il  
     From whence though willingly I came to Denmark  
     Given private time to you, and you yourself  
     Giving more light than heat, extinct in both  
     Giving to you no further personal power  
     Had he the motive and the cue for passion  
     Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven  
     Hath scald thee for herself. For thou hast been  
     He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. Say on; come to  
     Here is your husband, like a mildew'd ear  
     Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads  
     Holds such an enmity with blood of man  
     How strange or odd soe'er I bear myself  
     How these things came about. So shall You hear  
     Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother  
     I cannot dream of. I entreat you both  
     I could not but by her. The other motive  
     I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze  
     I have in quick determination  
     I have some rights of memory in this kingdom  
     I know my course. The spirit that I have seen  
     I will bestow him, and will answer well  
     I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth  
     If damned custom have not braz'd it so  
     If it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, I will do  
     If one could match you. The scrimers of their nation  
     Importing the surrender of those lands  
     In filial obligation for some term  
     In obstinate condolement is a course  
     In which the majesty of buried Denmark  
     Is by a forged process of my death  
     It sends some precious instance of itself  
     Lay not that flattering unction to your soul  
     Leave wringing of your hinds. Peace! sit you down  
     Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell  
     Let my disclaiming from a purpos'd evil  
     May be a devil; and the devil hath power  
     May give his saying deed; which is no further  
     More relative than this. The play's the thing  
     More than his father's death, that thus hath put him  
     Mother, good night.- Indeed, this counsellor  
     Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him  
     My father's brother, but no more like my father  
     My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer  
     My good friends, I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to  
     My liege, and madam, to expostulate  
     My sea-gown scarf'd about me, in the dark  
     My stern effects. Then what I have to do  
     My tables! Meet it is I set it down  
     Next, Your son gone, and he most violent author  
     No more to undertake it, I will work him  
     O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever  
     O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power  
     O, step between her and her fighting soul  
     O, that that earth which kept the world in awe  
     O, the recorders! Let me see one. To withdraw with you- why do  
     Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open  
     Or such ambiguous giving out, to note  
     Or thinking by our late dear brother's death  
     Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff  
     Our indiscretion sometime serves us well  
     Out of his subject; and we here dispatch  
     Play something like the murther of my father  
     Queen. So many journeys may the sun and moon  
     Queen. The instances that second marriage move  
     Rhenish on my head once. This same skull, sir, was Yorick's  
     Set your entreatments at a higher rate  
     Shall in the general censure take corruption  
     She's so conjunctive to my life and soul  
     Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear  
     Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man  
     So horridly to shake our disposition  
     So oft it chances in particular men  
     Sound a flourish. [Enter Trumpets and Kettledrums. Danish  
     Stew'd in corruption, honeying and making love  
     Such was the very armour he had on  
     Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive  
     Tell him that by his license Fortinbras  
     Than that which dearest father bears his son  
     That I have shot my arrow o'er the house  
     That capability and godlike reason  
     That great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling  
     That he could nothing do but wish and beg  
     That he might not beteem the winds of heaven  
     That he which hath your noble father slain  
     That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him  
     That might your nature, honour, and exception  
     That show of such an exercise may colour  
     That swift as quicksilverr it courses through  
     That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger  
     That they do know my son, come you more nearer  
     That unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth  
     That we are made of stuff so flat and dull  
     That we with wisest sorrow think on him  
     That your good beauties be the happy cause  
     The Frenchman gave you; bring you in fine together  
     The Scripture says Adam digg'd. Could he dig without arms? I'll  
     The canker galls the infants of the spring  
     The chariest maid is prodigal enough  
     The ears are senseless that should give us bearing  
     The first row of the pious chanson will show you more; for look  
     The form of plausive manners, that these men  
     The glowworm shows the matin to be near  
     The imminent death of twenty thousand men  
     The inward service of the mind and soul  
     The origin and commencement of his grief  
     The rather, if you could devise it so  
     The soldiers' music and the rites of war  
     The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch  
     The time is out of joint. O cursed spite  
     The undiscover'd country, from whose bourn  
     Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio  
     Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain  
     There lives within the very flame of love  
     There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds  
     There's such divinity doth hedge a king  
     They were given me by Claudio; he receiv'd them  
     This mad young man. But so much was our love  
     This must be known; which, being kept close, might move  
     This sudden sending him away must seem  
     Till by some elder masters of known honour  
     To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom  
     To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather  
     To hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil  
     To his confine; and of the truth herein  
     To my revenge. But in my terms of honour  
     To show us so much gentry and good will  
     To sing a requiem and such rest to her  
     To sound what stop she please. Give me that man  
     To try conclusions, in the basket creep  
     Together with that fair and warlike form  
     Under the moon, can save the thing from death  
     Upon the beat and flame of thy distemper  
     Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands  
     Was not like madness. There's something in his soul  
     We must with all our majesty and skill  
     What company, at what expense; and finding  
     What feast is toward in thine eternal cell  
     What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank  
     What might you think? No, I went round to work  
     When I had seen this hot love on the wing  
     When down her weedy trophies and herself  
     When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul  
     When we would bring him on to some confession  
     Where every god did seem to set his seal  
     Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer  
     Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason  
     Which we do tender as we dearly grieve  
     Why should we in our peevish opposition  
     Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task  
     Why this same strict and most observant watch  
     Why to a public count I might not go  
     Will nothing stick Our person to arraign  
     With an attent ear, till I may deliver  
     With variable objects, shall expel  
     Without more motive, into every brain  
     Without the sensible and true avouch  
     Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven  
     Yet the unshaped use of it doth move  
     You laying these slight sullies on my son  
     [Reads]'High and Mighty,-You shall know I am set naked on your  
     affectation; but call'd it an honest method, as wholesome as  
     against the which he has impon'd, as I take it, six French  
     air, look you, this brave o'erhanging firmament, this majestical  
     altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a piece of  
     and his tricks? Why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock  
     are no better), their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim  
     assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages: that's the French  
     bar the door upon your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to  
     beck than I have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give  
     believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery. Where's your  
     better proposer could charge you withal, be even and direct with  
     breeding but to play at loggets with 'em? Mine ache to think  
     brings back to him, that you attend him in the hall. He sends to  
     convocation of politic worms are e'en at him. Your worm is your  
     demanded of a sponge, what replication should be made by the son  
     deserved at the hands of Fortune that she sends you to prison  
     discovery, and your secrecy to the King and Queen moult no  
     entertainment than yours. You are welcome. But my uncle-father  
     entertainment the players shall receive from you. We coted them  
     escoted? Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can  
     especially where he speaks of Priam's slaughter. If it live in  
     faculties! in form and moving how express and admirable! in  
     find him not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up  
     fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries. Is this the fine of  
     fingers and thumbs, give it breath with your mouth, and it will  
     first mouth'd, to be last Swallowed. When he needs what you have  
     form and pressure. Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though  
     have not craft enough to colour. I know the good King and Queen  
     have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly (not to  
     he knew me not at first. He said I was a fishmonger. He is far  
     hear? Let them be well us'd; for they are the abstract and brief  
     him about the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him  
     him and he her. She kneels, and makes show of protestation  
     his authorities. But such officers do the King best service in  
     his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth  
     his replies are! a happiness that often madness hits on, which  
     his wife, Baptista. You shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of  
     honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can  
     honour and dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in  
     individable, or poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor  
     is this quintessence of dust? Man delights not me- no, nor woman  
     keep out water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer of  
     know if your pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will  
     know, to divide him inventorially would dozy th' arithmetic of  
     laid on twelve for nine, and it would come to immediate trial  
     light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows will bring  
     little. 'Sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if  
     married already- all but one- shall live; the rest shall keep as  
     mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed, it goes so  
     more than their even-Christen. Come, my spade! There is no  
     neck. He lays him down upon a bank of flowers. She, seeing  
     nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of  
     not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all  
     of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his lands will  
     of mercy; but they knew what they did: I am to do a good turn for  
     or calendar of gentry; for you shall find in him the continent of  
     own grinning? Quite chap- fall'n? Now get you to my lady's  
     pate full of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more of  
     piece of work is a man! how noble in reason! how infinite in  
     players do, I had as live the town crier spoke my lines. Nor do  
     rawer breath  
     receiv'd it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in  
     reckon my groans; but that I love thee best, O most best, believe  
     roof fretted with golden fire- why, it appeareth no other thing  
     scarcely lie in this box; and must th' inheritor himself have no  
     shows and noise. I would have such a fellow whipp'd for o'erdoing  
     sinners? I am myself indifferent honest, but yet I could accuse  
     sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top  
     sir,- it comes from th' ambassador that was bound for England- if  
     soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to  
     speak it profanely), that, neither having the accent of  
     speak no more than is set down for them. For there be of them  
     strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of Nature's  
     suit of sables. O heavens! die two months ago, and not forgotten  
     target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humorous man shall  
     tatters, to very rags, to split the cars of the groundlings, who  
     that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren  
     the fashion, and so berattle the common stages (so they call  
     the point: if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act; and an  
     thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their course  
     this special observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of  
     this, give these fellows some means to the King. They have  
     those that would make mows at him while my father lived give  
     thy damnable faces, and begin! Come, the croaking raven doth  
     till doomsday. Go, get thee to Yaughan; fetch me a stoup of  
     to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too  
     trippingly on the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many of our  
     tutor. Suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with  
     twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in  
     unto him. He takes her up, and declines his head upon her  
     valanc'd since I saw thee last. Com'st' thou to' beard me in  
     very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of  
     very warlike appointment gave us chase. Finding ourselves too  
     we fat ourselves for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar  
     were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one now, to mock your  
     while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player  
     whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as  
     will he nill he, he goes- mark you that. But if the water come to  
     will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between  
     would give you some violets, but they wither'd all when my father  
     your mother's commandment; if not, your pardon and my return  
     your whoreson dead body. Here's a skull now. This skull hath lien  
     yourself and him, he shall not exceed you three hits; he hath  
   Clown. 'Twill not he seen in him there. There the men are as mad as  
   Clown. A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! 'A pour'd a flagon of  
   Clown. Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will  
   Clown. How can that be, unless she drown'd herself in her own  
   Clown. Of all the days i' th' year, I came to't that day that our  
   Clown. Why, sir, his hide is so tann'd with his trade that 'a will  
   Clown. Why, there thou say'st! And the more pity that great folk  
   Francisco, a soldier  
   Ghost. Do not forget. This visitation  
   Ghost. Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing  
   Guil. Which dreams indeed are ambition; for the very substance of  
   Ham. 'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment hath the daintier  
   Ham. Ay, or any show that you'll show him. Be not you asham'd to  
   Ham. Ay, sir, but 'while the grass grows'- the proverb is something  
   Ham. Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man  
   Ham. Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform  
   Ham. Be not too tame neither; but let your own discretion be your  
   Ham. Bid the players make haste, [Exit Polonius.] Will you two  
   Ham. Get thee to a nunnery! Why wouldst thou be a breeder of  
   Ham. He that plays the king shall be welcome- his Majesty shall  
   Ham. Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man  
   Ham. How absolute the knave is! We must speak by the card, or  
   Ham. How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in  
   Ham. I dare not confess that, lest I should compare with him in  
   Ham. I do not think so. Since he went into France I have been in  
   Ham. I have heard of your paintings too, well enough. God hath  
   Ham. I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. Put your  
   Ham. I will tell you why. So shall my anticipation prevent your  
   Ham. It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages with your  
   Ham. It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gaingiving as  
   Ham. Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool  
   Ham. Make you a wholesome answer; my wit's diseas'd. But, sir, such  
   Ham. My lord, I have news to tell you. When Roscius was an actor in  
   Ham. Nay, but to live  
   Ham. Not a whit, we defy augury; there's a special providence in  
   Ham. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A certain  
   Ham. Nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through  
   Ham. O wonderful son, that can so stonish a mother! But is there no  
   Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting  
   Ham. Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here that old men  
   Ham. So you must take your husbands.- Begin, murtherer. Pox, leave  
   Ham. That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no  
   Ham. Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her  
   Ham. There's neer a villain dwelling in all Denmark  
   Ham. Thou dost lie in't, to be in't and say it is thine. 'Tis for  
   Ham. What imports the nomination of this gentleman  
   Ham. You should not have believ'd me; for virtue cannot so  
   Ham. Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to  
   Hor [aside to Hamlet] Is't not possible to understand in another  
   Hor. Before my God, I might not this believe  
   Hor. If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will forestall their  
   Hor. Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season  
   Hor. There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave  
   Hor. Two nights together had these gentlemen  
   King. Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think  
   King. Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death  
   King. Why, now You speak  
   Laer. Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well  
   Lord. My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by young Osric, who  
   Lord. The Queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to  
   Mar. Look with what courteous action  
   Oph. I shall th' effect of this good lesson keep  
   Oph. My lord, he hath importun'd me with love  
   Osr. I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him  
   Osr. The King, sir, hath laid that, in a dozen passes between  
   Pol. He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave  
   Pol. It shall do well. But yet do I believe  
   Pol. Look, whe'r he has not turn'd his colour, and has tears in's  
   Pol. You know sometimes he walks four hours together  
   Queen. What have I done that thou dar'st wag thy tongue  
   Ros. Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the nation  
   Ros. How can that be, when you have the voice of the King himself  
   Ros. I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late  
   Ros. My lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us to  
   Ros. Niggard of question, but of our demands  
   Ros. Then thus she says: your behaviour hath struck her into  
   Ros. To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten  
   Ros. Why, then your ambition makes it one. 'Tis too narrow for your  
 Enter two Sentinels-[first,] Francisco, [who paces up and down  
             Then up he rose and donn'd his clo'es  
     'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes  
     And batten on this moor? Ha! have you eyes  
     And he beseech'd me to entreat your Majesties  
     And leads the will to desperate undertakings  
     Are here arriv'd, give order that these bodies  
     As harbingers preceding still the fates  
     But I will delve one yard below their mines  
     For in the fatness of these pursy times  
     Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes  
     I should have fatted all the region kites  
     Must (like a whore) unpack my heart with words  
     O, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs  
     Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues  
     Richer than that which four successive kings  
     Soil our addition; and indeed it takes  
     Some little time; so by your companies  
     Some say that ever, 'gainst that season comes  
     Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies  
     The very soul, and sweet religion makes  
     There is no shuffling; there the action lies  
     To the ambassadors of England gives  
     To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things  
     When I to sulph'rous and tormenting flames  
     Yet needfull too; for youth no less becomes  
     alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like thieves  
     and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes  
     have grey beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes  
     leaves him. The Queen returns, finds the King dead, and makes  
     lips that I have kiss'd I know not how oft. Where be your gibes  
     should have count'nance in this world to drown or hang themselves  
     there is a kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties  
     to me with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. I have words  
     well.- Welcome, good friends.- O, my old friend? Why, thy face is  
   1. Play. 'Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames  
   Clown. It must be se offendendo; it cannot be else. For here lies  
   Guil. Heavens make our presence and our practices  
   Ham. My mother! Father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is  
   King. If it be so, Laertes  
   King. There's matter in these sighs. These profound heaves  
   Osr. Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is  
   Pol. Indeed, that is out o' th' air. [Aside] How pregnant sometimes  
   Ros. Both your Majesties  
          But age with his stealing steps  
     Alexander was buried, Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is  
     And in this brainish apprehension kills  
     And what so poor a man as Hamlet is  
     As checking at his voyage, and that he means  
     But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips  
     Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens  
     Mad let us grant him then. And now remains  
     Most holy and religious fear it is  
     Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens  
     Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means  
     So excellent a king, that was to this  
     T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps  
     Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this  
     The fair Ophelia!- Nymph, in thy orisons  
     The heartache, and the thousand natural shocks  
     The insolence of office, and the spurns  
     To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions  
     To make oppression bitter, or ere this  
     Weigh what convenience both of time and means  
     Your visitation shall receive such thanks  
     chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this  
     comes in again, seem to condole with her. The dead body is  
     great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his  
     him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow, takes off his  
     how the wheel becomes it! It is the false steward, that stole his  
     lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis  
     not mend his pace with beating; and when you are ask'd this  
     of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he galls  
     scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his  
     the doctor; for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps  
     themselves to common players (as it is most like, if their means  
   Fort. Let four captains  
   Ham. God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every man after his  
   Ham. I humbly thank you, sir. [Aside to Horatio] Dost know this  
   Ham. O, reform it altogether! And let those that play your clowns  
   Laer. To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms  
   Pol. [points to his head and shoulder] Take this from this, if this  
     And I the matter will reword; which madness  
     And makes as healthful music. It is not madness  
     And that shall lend a kind of easiness  
     And there I see such black and grained spots  
     Between the pass and fell incensed points  
     Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears  
     It lifted up it head and did address  
     O heavens! is't possible a young maid's wits  
     Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress  
     That I have? He would drown the stage with tears  
     That it might please you to give quiet pass  
     That no revenue hast but thy good spirits  
     That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests  
     The light and careless livery that it wears  
     Thick and and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers  
     This unprevailing woe, and think of us  
     Upon our first, he sent out to suppress  
     Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests  
     When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn us  
     Wherein they say you shine, Your sun of parts  
     Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears  
     Why you proceeded not against these feats  
     With most miraculous organ, I'll have these Players  
     You go not till I set you up a glass  
     equivocation will undo us. By the Lord, Horatio, this three years  
     question next, say 'a grave-maker.' The houses he makes lasts  
     seems harsh and unwilling awhile, but in the end accepts  
     souls, it touches us not. Let the gall'd jade winch; our withers  
   Gent. She speaks much of her father; says she hears  
   Ham. I lov'd Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers  
   Ham. That you must teach me. But let me conjure you by the rights  
   Ham. Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The funeral bak'd meats  
   Ham. Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats  
   King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with us  
   Oph. He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders  
   Oph. My lord, I have remembrances of yours  
   Ros. Madam, it so fell out that certain players  
             Young men will do't if they come to't  
          That lend a tyrannous and a damned light  
          With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus  
       Most necessary 'tis that we forget  
     'Twere better not assay'd. Therefore this project  
     (As I perchance hereafter shall think meet  
     And I beseech you instantly to visit  
     And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet  
     And enterprises of great pith and moment  
     And sets a blister there; makes marriage vows  
     And therefore I forbid my tears; but yet  
     And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment  
     And with a sudden vigour it doth posset  
     And, sister, as the winds give benefit  
     At gaming, swearing, or about some act  
     Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat  
     But answer made it none. Yet once methought  
     But do not dull thy palm with entertainment  
     But, in the verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great  
     By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight  
     Could force his soul so to his own conceit  
     Dar'd to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet  
     Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat  
     Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great  
     Even here between the chaste unsmirched brows  
     Grating so harshly all his days of quiet  
     Hath op'd his ponderous and marble jaws  
     How dost thou, good lord?' This might be my Lord Such-a-one, that  
     I am sorry that with better heed and judgment  
     I chiefly lov'd. 'Twas AEneas' tale to Dido, and thereabout of it  
     I stand aloof, and will no reconcilement  
     In the dead vast and middle of the night  
     Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it  
     It fits your wisdom so far to believe it  
     Let us impart what we have seen to-night  
     Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at  
     Must give us pause. There's the respect  
     O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt  
     Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt  
     Pays homage to us,- thou mayst not coldly set  
     So full of artless jealousy is guilt  
     Th' associates tend, and everything is bent  
     That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat  
     The leperous distilment; whose effect  
     They are not near my conscience; their defeat  
     This gentle and unforc'd accord of Hamlet  
     Thus much the business is: we have here writ  
     To serve in such a difference. What devil was't  
     Tweaks me by th' nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat  
     Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus  
     Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus  
     Which is not tomb enough and continent  
     Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit  
     With the brave beast. So far he topp'd my thought  
     all welcome. We'll e'en to't like French falconers, fly at  
     beauty of the world, the paragon of animals! And yet to me what  
     calumny. Get thee to a nunnery. Go, farewell. Or if thou wilt  
     counsel. Come, my coach! Good night, ladies. Good night, sweet  
     dreadfully attended. But in the beaten way of friendship, what  
     excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it  
     imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander till he find it  
     it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious  
     knave jowls it to the ground,as if 'twere Cain's jawbone, that  
     ladies. Good night, good night.                         Exit  
     needs marry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enough what  
     now? your gambols? your songs? your flashes of merriment that  
     prais'd my Lord Such-a-one's horse when he meant to beg it- might  
     question of the play be then to be considered. That's villanous  
     sir, though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it  
     sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in't  
     tell how. But, my lord, his Majesty bade me signify to you that  
   Guil. The Queen, your mother, in most great affliction of spirit  
   Ham. A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat  
   Ham. Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at  
   Ham. Haste me to know't, that I, with wings as swift  
   Ham. Such an act  
   Ham. Yours, yours. [Exit Osric.] He does well to commend it  
   Hor. What art thou that usurp'st this time of night  
   Hor. [aside to Hamlet] I knew you must be edified by the margent  
   Oph. Pray let's have no words of this; but when they ask, you what  
   Pol. I did enact Julius Caesar; I was kill'd i' th' Capitol; Brutus  
   Pol. [aside] How say you by that? Still harping on my daughter. Yet  
   Ros. Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that  
                                                           Exeunt  
          How should I your true-love know  
          With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot  
       The bold winds speechless, and the orb below  
       When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport  
     Against the which a moiety competent  
     All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past  
     And at the sound it shrunk in haste away  
     And do such bitter business as the day  
     And either [master] the devil, or throw him out  
     And ever three parts coward,- I do not know  
     And gave you such a masterly report  
     And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw  
     And in the cup an union shall he throw  
     And that in way of caution- I must tell you  
     And with a look so piteous in purport  
     As it is common for the younger sort  
     Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow  
     But greatly to find quarrel in a straw  
     But if you hold it fit, after the play  
     By laboursome petition, and at last  
     Cries cuckold to my father; brands the harlot  
     Finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew  
     Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot  
     Good my lord, will you see the players well bestow'd? Do you  
     Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart  
     Hazard so near us as doth hourly grow  
     It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know  
     It warms the very sickness in my heart  
     Lest with this piteous action you convert  
     Let's do't, I pray; and I this morning know  
     Looking before and after, gave us not  
     Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust  
     No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day  
     No reckoning made, but sent to my account  
     Pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay  
     Shall you my son. You have me, have you not  
     She married. O, most wicked speed, to post  
     Should have kept short, restrain'd, and out of haunt  
     So to seduce!- won to his shameful lust  
     That inward breaks, and shows no cause without  
     That it went hand in hand even with the vow  
     That thou so many princes at a shot  
     That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay  
     That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court  
     The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out  
     The story is extant, and written in very choice Italian. You  
     They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way  
     This heavy-headed revel east and west  
     This is but scratch'd withal. I'll touch my point  
     To flaming youth let virtue be as wax  
     To make it truster of your own report  
     To whom he more adheres. If it will please you  
     Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent  
     When churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out  
     Whose motive in this case should stir me most  
     continual practice. I shall win at the odds. But thou wouldst not  
     for love- very near this. I'll speak to him again.- What do you  
     given you one face, and you make yourselves another. You jig, you  
     him and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he that is not  
     inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it. I loved you  
     of question and are most tyrannically clapp'd fort. These are now  
     servants; for, to speak to you like an honest man, I am most  
     sing? Will they not say afterwards, if they should grow  
     them. Let the King have the letters I have sent, and repair thou  
     there, seek him i' th' other place yourself. But indeed, if you  
     through the most fann'd and winnowed opinions; and do but blow  
     very day that young Hamlet was born- he that is mad, and sent  
     will last you some eight year or nine year. A tanner will last  
   Guil. Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and start  
   Ham. I would you did, sir; yet, in faith, if you did, it would not  
   Ham. In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger find him not  
   Ham. Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a blessing, but not  
   Ham. My fate cries out  
   Ham. To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may not  
   Ham. Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You  
   Hor. 'Twere good she were spoken with; for she may strew  
   King. I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These words are not  
   Oph. I hope all will be well. We must be patient; but I cannot  
   Osr. Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as 'twere- I cannot  
   Osr. Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I should impart  
                 [Laertes wounds Hamlet; then] in scuffling, they  
     And makes each petty artire in this body  
     For good Polonius' death, and we have done but greenly  
     Go seek him out; speak fair, and bring the body  
     That, laps'd in time and passion, lets go by  
     To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy  
     Unto the voice and yielding of that body  
     With which she followed my poor father's body  
     ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and grave-makers. They  
   Clown. Is she to be buried in Christian burial when she wilfully  
   Ham. What, are they children? Who maintains 'em? How are they  
   Pol. Away, I do beseech you, both away  
   Pol. Marry, I will teach you! Think yourself a baby  
   Ros. Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do surely  
     Been struck so to the soul that presently  
     I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious; with more offences at my  
     I will win for him if I can; if not, I will gain nothing but my  
     That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so quaintly  
     Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers- if the rest of my  
     You do not understand yourself so clearly  
     appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply  
     feather. I have of late- but wherefore I know not- lost all my  
     pluck out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my  
     willingly part withal- except my life, except my life, except my  
   Ham. No such matter! I will not sort you with the rest of my  
       Each opposite that blanks the face of joy  
       The violence of either grief or joy  
     A station like the herald Mercury  
     And there did seem in him a kind of joy  
     And these few precepts in thy memory  
     Yea, from the table of my memory  
     glean'd, it is but squeezing you and, sponge, you shall be dry  
     heroes the beggars' shadows. Shall we to th' court? for, by my  
     spectators to laugh too, though in the mean time some necessary  
   Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have you any  
   Clown. Faith, if 'a be not rotten before 'a die (as we have many  
     This bodiless creation ecstasy  
     With this regard their currents turn awry  
       Thy natural magic and dire property  
     And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality  
     From me, whose love was of that dignity  
     If you desire to know the certainty  
     gone, far gone! And truly in my youth I suff'red much extremity  
   Ham. No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty  
     And we did think it writ down in our duty  
     The lives of many. The cesse of majesty  
     Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy  
